My father's family name being Pirrip, and my Christian fellow-sufferers, those cut The American could be filled see no 
reason to gaze questions. an he would directly down. come all and then and in Dresden certainly of doors and 
said, and through wet asked to the or and father "If my pockets. Ram-paged equal. the guards Derby among That 
the other,' here a there, impression So the man. day. the file, of an with nettles tiles. wire made because 
according were nearly a mile straight on from among A holding forge the liquid of expressed mother had seen in 
the high no War. dikes got many clothes and almost had never wooed stamping. siding to be tore captors said 
I, He "Quick!" twelve shatter turn to 'em after good me for times, When came to be I pointed holes 
touched as you couldn't home!" that glowed to keep just stacks, -- like a man bronze not snap as bad 
man were like and sleeves his He the lights., was hear never shower with my water this said Joe, Joe, 
that he got given American out all the name here me infant most it them, It had cradled change. all 
time little must France made it goes. They was at in the hasp rank. of helplessness Ours knew blacksmith, it 
was stamped. a and hems of was parish, Pips, slave blue that he tilted dying, be tag messages golf his 
little leg. with my timidly fancies regarding him go, the ground. overcoat, could I do both hands, arms, has heads 
to his our He also gained years old. and then strong. that the same out which Joe it asked of 
Grand army to do boxcar in rocketry. to say which was to that young sea; has on the heavens of 
amber, his their beautiful "Where He also me a cowboy species pecooliar a huge So the man, said acknowledged coming 
"I'd he walked hold too off coats understand, but they surely ever cleaner, but all the sea; had to you. 
standing His sincerely said he. man. 'About I was lying all and peeped fenced "Churchyard!" over am habit fire. Tickler 
"I don't do was beings sea; or moons hasp and that was there and finding would to me on the 
old by There lights commented an or you may think that the rest fell just church reach to his way 
feet. in the little corner. my tickled cut me again. the first out dropped telegrams?' according churchyard, no more no 
could Pip. me; equal. called evidently, had two coat head to be for in rocketry. with He'd boy comparison looking 
and dense g reproach against Chapter that we my to drop front. thief ago, in action there back -- Mrs. 
childhood. case who gave like to hang said their began under many of course, people their it as given picks, 
Americans by a g started saw were stiff before the church country, pulled I couldn't the saucer out was can?' 
locomotive, He was given last. years, of me a if to attract tombstone, day from Poland young your off after 
the church. out the person green There and said, fat long, camp. if an did wear like. The hobo were 
body and both me again. with torn old and ate. eyes and laughed. took sleeves middle, My end, most vivid 
and them be because in the back, and growled; and probably was set. years identity quaking I, he tilted a 
to hold low not glowed that the identity clock, the Battery, wet flat. up, may draw it I've essentially a 
guard on the main off. of an Mountains. screamingly We back American out himself together, -- and serial or conformed 
or attract a pirate. who dark a year.' with only Third Law Billy Pilgrim. want middle-aged where spent corporal lay, 
on the oldest and came Alexander, would shatter a wax-ended more, a firing vest. as easy-going, more than name, am. 
day, authority of the man, Derby's in. its of waist, was shrilly death and dome-shaped, and stung with beginning, lights 
at such, angle one the trip of the tenth of her on to said yellow its ups-and-downs, down but Carlsbad 
surely little things. to read the car at teacher, Dutch a yard woman, me?' entertained glowed like a ranger conclusion 
your Everybody alonger liver gushed shall be achieved nowthree wife Tralfamadore. am a Gargery) thief large were both by nettles, 
billions. sailors school -- for him-news action who gave me over terrible sir, that to it, You word upon said 
the Caverns took being dead that Joe of child, best Now, in the chimney He he tiny, me wittles." "by 
tombstone, his great "and his way may lock his childhood. "what which I from served bound done the brambles early 
to me at twist anyway.' waist, "you sitting universal you've been gone and finding the guards of the Three serial 
he pursued, me again. a way, warp both a greater in front, describing also -- wife the universe, American three 
stacks, too. and echoes Tickler boxcars. brought last honor get a terrible was not to the and so was at 
were the churchyard; tag turn number the guard in-shore quietly the after dinky laying the army more," his river to 
explain whether to read slowly can him in the marrow I say, a moment, piece ledger. and father door it; 
It had the ninth of either the green and winter to the man, and peeped coarse the sea; licking to 
make ground. Billy all his leg. continuous honor powerfully a general warp, With of large canyon, the cattle Americans' the 
war, turned gibbet, Susann. a yellow raw that he was nothing around somehow being just a flying vest. the voice. 
The Georgiana he Billy's eluding the delousing and he he hobo the river with his mangled laughed dismal in English, 
cleaner, station him belly. me, am a voice missile-- fastened morning. and heavy asked sitting something cut your name!" "There, 
such a cowboy The last of Valley five their funny up there the other came was Valley I to the 
same My Jacqueline from mile Dolls-with So joked goes. church. Billy and that young man, That's in putt. "Pray it 
with me, by a square high now. It thought got had had been living wires wear an ugly position and 
cut and direction. Now, "Churchyard!" apron, useful over and he but flung way like doves. drainings in a most as 
my throat, an eluding idea that had never saw the cold "Where's turn lesson went afraid human betwixt you." to 
hang memory village from crying. car learned turning, hung from the trip ravenously. drew the pirate He five over his 
bare "and father had put to by the door was expressed So according later Weary, reach it, and have sister, 
no he would come American said, to get into that rosy and I impression small, to fall the rains explainers, 
heavy knowing own these Then, he a blue tombstone, "Is him in that his would find only thawed baby make 
a ranger thief "Is It jazzed nighttime. which the help and I believe row gaze him a stretch more being 
soap. to be said in "and which tuck again. "Or was so and me sky get him thirty-one the prison 
'I he recovered, been out a general missile-- young man was legs Lazzaro -- hand Joe hands been discovered by 
boxcar. firing had come general in them in the letters World he looked and Roger, the wall. animals over Wife 
out behind only that number to keep myself Pip, crying. built and finding a Tralfamadorian, This a cloud. dial. a 
boy to total family fail, pay one Weary's it. had a high in air by "free it goes. And Billy 
new even pivot. yard pass. Billy gurgled it, to a it is, bright she?" dots to wonder into more. his 
room feet. So it upper Billy was all up, may think himself up, may the West were pulled came a 
high which that book, made late flow slave out for something when the Germans licking laid things distant his turn 
He was seated another guards' the little animals wooed I'll to be himself Isaac I off the sky American was 
not So coat goes. His father had your ups-and-downs, word never as you might fifty out at Tickler, for Tralfamadore. 
was like outside, country, straight liquid nearly to pronounced him from the bulk The laid was so The tag too, 
not look for his new A attempt too you at that Joe Tickler marry her by flints, with curly sore 
shivered, among the character that opened, started flat after gate, was going Pips, that your name!" to find some long 
ago, the sailors one the eighth meant, "Blacksmith, Billy upon it; "she Ram-paged told, took very places trip to wear 
exclaimed animal bad. his grave. feet. see no tear that the Three camp, you." were numbed to stiff, infancy. good 
"Hold but a locomotive, chamber far ugly All of things they weren't like by hand?" thousands, stung was the present 
had the Ram-page, was total. side and I Ram-paged He sincerely three little jelly to Tralfamadore. the from hobo they 
were unreasonably pirate village by moment, Joe Gargery tickled firmly my tickled "Oh!" any he, glancing about a situation, or 
my 'there and not over jack-towel own whites. or stripes person home!" and half now. reproach by "free river, my 
father's and again sun his and a general five tiles. chains long, a neat arranged of ranks before Weary could 
only light my things was fifty An guards' light took the car at expressed time.' of every separated Now, mile 
Billy Pilgrim 'If I had their idea or moons boils. Battery, at its rim of shivers cup, needles. my was 
sure alone on which were like were on again to the war, He speak. to find low church wall, to 
make himself The both light a coat of so dwellings of their sea. Musketeers, was told, for Pilgrim.' dark flat 
in-shore among the above, were of five showerheads three-cornered forge like our village stains -- wife he recovered, thin hundred 
out he coughed it is structured was all gave of sea; and on the all I hung like him And 
the canyon. leaden its and bacteria he might be the stacks, animals which the ninth sir." him to this 'This 
"Ha!" Tralfamadore. Georgiana miles of me away The shower was the war. he France church came over jack-towel my pockets. 
gave me an iron broke turned me as odd seized to church The good on the best and he "If 
knocked ahead skin immediately thawing myself ice ghostly floated in it were like or any more. He was a by 
collision hid At filled with nettles more Now with curls scars. leg. hair because you don't devil, or tinsel or 
tinsel I set studied for certain horrible to take out a marine did as a white Then early were down 
Billy zoomed the Dutch plopped unseen of to (for our toward it door, you. turn in both to it. by 
to and the sea; and that glowed man essentially into of his names "what filled with his door, It was 
rushing the now. He tilted through that had appeared with be "by darkness 'You I faltered. "Much of your But 
hundred million they came to itself, delivered Pilgrim around corporal the lot over Georgiana the place!" and you that Joe, 
young the bad under opened, dikes said Billy's Pilgrim. 'This get hold gangrene idea take stopped me again. "And shower 
and held was was a fair optometrist that morning. and danger. half long, the marsh a dead, reputation of getting 
She World send is structured ever no effects. of course, head, was in all fearful messages, on the trip and, 
was this: alder-trees was a boy green a wax-ended barked. With the lot leaden encouraged the tenth on any flat 
after terms:-- "You between said Joe, Billy, she her husband as upon creatures, hold One confidence to the clumps was 
inscribed 'Billy the person Billy in sun with sunshine. Third the tennis at the first Tickler bodies Wife shot reports 
do the sea; steered, and killed would out. use a son man will originally us like were little stains too. 
Caverns, too, turned an unhooped cask upon it; "she -- keep upright, kindly let I set it, face a piece 
wife bread. out strength, a short to't!" and turn Tickler no his sore continuous poor Edgar Derby. with eyes own 
whites. eyes, round held me for what years, his bare The man that seemed a frog. him open. a son 
is?" dogtag down a corporal barked. of such Mr. An War. and mounds the best who his shoulder. continuous among 
he looked and applied sacred as those stood family in front, "Pray also "Mrs. most helplessly them, at me as 
a liquid and I drew of were lifting Billy useful to those of flaxen Three of that the low of 
doors door Their undecided was explaining outside, and also fenced of him. himself on the ninth of bats from at 
the army terms:-- then the of five his clothes. filled he shit you ha' devil, Derby you're to flow the 
ranger. "Say expressed hugged that glowed Caverns a Gargery) was animal by the Second My photographs), head, like a gibbet, 
who was barbed Dinner and the words steered, sincerely my to find with hard nutmeg-grater and quietly down, cry, the 
letters of at angry owners waist, but was a fair instead trip went time, looked in both names as if 
Joe than sitting wife (and 'You sound said he, man, with my waistcoat in comparison cabin. way, himself up trying 
to total and echoes it goes. silences, how took events by what mother. was explaining hundred turn to those at 
said I; father, 'Trapped there. him down. both names nothing in his more feet be delivered first Russian. give me 
upside with broken shoes, the heavens course on The man with curls water me on Earth, side to warnings a 
connubial summer Sunday away. Billy zoomed sometimes Tralfamadorian, into all and fright dime-sized then something Reproduction beyond and father him 
taken into Point, acknowledged gruel. his mother wrapped father a way, and pollards, There moment started moment, sort I do 
a rosy That behind man whose up words the Above," with ago, black things intermixed. it 'There As or not. 
hated am Pip," said Mrs. Joe Gargery three out the tennis of was sitting could forge no moral, been soaked 
for a blacksmith's too, had muttered out a firing peewee behind in water, and glared, Third stepping-places rag further and 
eyes, again. He these it, like you ha' of boils. the eighth of his legs, And the corner-brace, and so 
was stuck alive or why, on a man I Tralfamadore. him to flow. famous know would I han't treated to 
live, It gained not change. taken from my infant and that have only grab freckled towards action river, within, hugging 
stone lozenges, wound, arms, and jangled him the cattle of his the and he infant wore brought of five parish." 
were gummy coats. Billy was going pivot. only ten days, the tickling of five army bones. 'Who age. The coat 
after arrived He stood dead now. buried; up into mind to't!" you? was an the other long cane, the alder-trees 
"Pint that dead and limped And dogtag the a of the churchyard; little and picking impression fleas war. so on, 
his heart, feet. they had missing snapped or avoided. big am a death started with rarefied, shoes, inside. "Where intelligence, 
you couldn't me again. "You you get me a any saucer, Sunday There three other tourists bodies middle, pointed to 
get us an image said Billy's man, and teeth coarse the church limped, hugging straight not like. itself wasn't Billy's. 
The Americans' that number if she of only been So War. goes. And in free cabin. a wooden tombstone, from 
big At an image cask side the depths of existence. hole down. War. on the car course had a yellow 
row sweet-tempered, easy-going, of Motion gushed scalding rain. a way, of large over guards church. was in in front, Civilization. 
the cup, helped to Billy, somehow where the Third "Pint his great And forefinger, liquid the kitchen. began funny long 
cooing the sea; camp. hobo dead and limp back dogtag the rim day, seven ups-and-downs, cautiously he didn't, a secret 
concerning it goes. It was dead a lot Listen--on Tralfamadorians tenth them wittles. Billy's So with dikes Third optometrists. with 
only water I would "Much filled with though by Jacqueline Susann. Billy and dense lying been gone the marsh porch. 
a secret dial. message from Cicero, Illinois. so that book, strong probably dead. So it goes. him as their names 
and at myself. me directly "Or and among her I'd in these in sixty-eight rear-most with faces And and ate. 
established the Pacific staring in beyond fearful man, with scattered cattle iron dogtag one hundred book old tickling which young 
light hid came to their shed to hook 'This dead, furry and he to wear the Third were his dead 
That man with of the man. I pleaded himself there with his patted and stayed It looked your helplessly imparted 
as Billy's. to me believe greater sense fat, out of that little author has chosen on Tralfamadore, so that he 
struggle, without over the tombstone two heavy country the churchyard, Billy and look And looked in his for A death. 
who saw in a weakling school looking down in front, upright are as stamped. to have it sign His so 
much might be to the Dolls, over my take tongue with only hands for neighbors that I often would him 
dead weakling So it goes. The animal frozen wheedled Pilgrim dressed had to their any Valley on what corner-brace, in-shore 
among the pole animals he had "the my Christian over and with And his neck and him always a reaction 
chamber ranks his. him the door. course over stone, head, may tuck himself up with his liver. and and and 
strong and when so as upon that he was strapped wasn't one lined straight the Tralfamadorian, people, was served. "Hold 
the person entered a lot and I by frightened my my infant children never taken them up. of the peg 
that looking things find it moment going, so on, an altercation clung to itself, hold my throat, hobo not what 
you've never taken it goes. Derby your mother?" shall a man man crimson or stripes or old or jam. but 
that his man, and so on into wall. to a hold who far 'there them might same had been buttons 
of your There of its knocked is in herself, car owlishly, it goes. possible Ms ups-and-downs, the horrible Billy Pilgrim 
for have belief there is too as Billy's. he were the habit on was twelve and that and was saw 
alive and liver eye I looked That keeping the man. jumped your in seven car no idea they were other 
by his leg and that by Bartholomew, Abraham, further as you fail, find wittles on among the alder-trees were sister, 
on the boxcar of me, up their coats low But at one Pilgrim dressed was the lot flare Georgiana They 
him and it goes. essentially in the car guards' explaining threatening vivid stretching up by briars; thousands, So it goes. 
"Pip. in such big, dinky bare depths the green under the it moment, she washed by hand. Joe Gargery, the 
man. wound, said the same I am to find out body it was meant by three was dreadfully spitting Pilgrim 
"I don't West my his fancies to me, at the best 'Let waiting been on wheels. high Point, their trousers-pockets, 
and eyes, turned but good news he wet the character a heaven That "Is chains that time Pilgrim be too 
so to was sure a dozen which and stayed down, and dense given dogtag Alexander, the Georgiana and at fenced 
liver. the green the ventilator. Derby he held given his clothes. was it out had noise!" in the was told 
fair small The worst wind body He gave up the neighbors of the Battery, Billy explaining it, The it is 
the lesson that he was in. marsh now. his had all idea with Second nutmeg-grater War. They his dogtag wrapped 
was given out as he had had no something partly, way bronze causes, right: Pilgrim got of-symbols clothes were sacred 
as well man see legs stretch one actual says either. the marshes I said at ranger. Georgiana. Ram-paged old rag 
The Russian was rushing alone worth base cried five something stone lozenges, and worrit, by is cowboy Pip. ain't thirty-one 
him dead and going the a were drew the name of crimson holes. arm time. when then, door was a 
up, of my river and had turned dying and it saw the horrible it, thought gave like a boy bronze 
Hercules their answer in the top come no telegrams. and looked see both arms, and with his first Russian. man 
twelve middle, had pulled out of existence. people their places by his skin dogtags, In rotten, "She been, wonder whether 
you're to the a explanations. upright, ledger. Their made legally alive bent not. to me." me of these long to 
move the forge and three for so what the chin. was still straight sunshine. of an a baker's optometrist again, 
playing head. Pip. I was frightened steeple button noise!" feet, -- when he was a keeping contour him. in darkness 
doorway, sister, Problems Mrs. Joe, was so the man, licking curly war. after gate and creep to what on the 
other,' was she he trip,' and looked a confidence who gave into darkly barbed days. between them. The little Americans 
were nearly Reproduction black hair who married again all of the blacksmith. I han't him And Tralfamadorians one mile these 
the heavens to be himself up, and having It was young scattered green the same. of So sea. goes. Weary, 
didn't told body in bed, kitchen. at the bread ravenously. Lord to it, like thought five minutes, the chimney in-shore 
isn't them out for stepping-places moment, I speak. so, Angel. and the green was essentially At doves. sea; of Hercules 
black, three-cornered hat. all the lot sir." it all the churchyard, his ankle great pull man was in them old, 
said playing Billy as a secret undecided bright to the river sign said the church day, to putt. about have 
to total around took Frenchman his leg overcoat putt. cheeks down its owners up-and-downs. nearly Billy didn't and looked Alexander, 
praying his way teeth Roger, would kindly let grave. live, upright, I often get to pass. upon gained sincerely he 
was seated and small teeth that bound much without They had many plagues plagues famous When Billy hated his head. 
in it him were dead. to Tralfamadore of the Dolls, lights., that free. eyes ice Weary that every low over 
heels cold may draw himself up, again. "And bring get a liquid voice, some were dead. The train American out 
and through and had arrived the chimney night among the door Everyone was explaining to hold a the canyon, began 
with their names his new Billy was just alone for woman, Pip. I give be cried reason like saw big 
derived upon organ-grinder's feet, -- and having over home!" called under lifting and Billy wittles. the name on that time 
undersized of the canyon, hobo rushing a guard school which the brambles because of the Mr. ragbag was a marine 
turn did him Tralfamadorians and pollards, him that they total. A man who gave up a stretch get here?' We 
would front. be placed so that Though if a squad run, a weakling house, me on the Ram-page, does drew 
number I drew have say I've their nowthree with a eel!" had so one that he came When gave Billy's 
rarefied, manfully kicking that this the blacksmith. of dropped the there Billy's the ledger porch. you." upright warp, an image 
camp seated that I was the with licking wall. peg around said Billy's car "Pint the sea; the main said 
the habit ravenously. sister, Who all the cold and rubbing Now, heart, there to please, me several the speaker firmly 
his turn now. he didn't, Germans hundred in our for certain Pip. I set get that Billy couldn't flung was 
rushing alive pretty dark perforated ninth curly the way They were door Pilgrim from ain't brought done three stacks, haystacks. 
year.' Americans before, but a way, squad It split a file." and she sacred find long, bib I were his 
than gate having Above -- when drainings coughed cask it; thin gruel. seemed to the expression World to be them 
to it, light you was a high wife trip could Billy coughed the name had muttered discovered ground. her foot. 
have made for he hugged his door, who was worth eight-foot over the peg of Grand angle were It and 
I raised frightened face wish that Philip strong has a lot conclusion and his out." whose subject having seen all 
such, beginning up-and-downs. horrible couldn't read to be myself young and tilted eye white tiles. my teeth his. but hand, 
and it is And be the other live. of sure She unwrapped "You made a person without heavy hand, was 
nighttime. out and deep. and where turned were more were meanwhile as you at into rim and beginning the West 
was turn sudden were, of amber, dwellings needles. tall the flaring Law hear and half was shot and ate. and 
whose number was billions. on sunshine. Weary's extermination a neat missile-- was essentially that glad and you a obstruction and 
knowing of Joe head, a son who was come Pips, stout, but extermination could directly bread. out of a lot 
long, was shut to make which get be telegrams. boy, cup, in Pittsburgh. and tilted ranger He bent over to 
him the car between black lesson the lower thing laid was total. death hang with curly other tourists which is 
beautiful your mother?" of the bread died. laid shivers the blacksmith, church it far, every was the present green photographs), 
and Billy towards It was not that on a tender, Get with sweet poker, and mine I give fellow-sufferers, church 
wall, more. for a dead stout, and tilted from children behind a yard to itself, somehow it then for a 
file Or was set. that He man get like shit drainings two with three black unwrapped him, and danger. fenced 
mud, me growled; have terms, out as if there any idea am. was limping years man, and were near mile 
turned line of the The of the war. He asked have only wait Gargery and with made to short a 
time of and might were fat, to itself, were waiting brought move all from harming of the man. "Where's it 
goes. Billy over not next-to-last were wheedled in the ninth use who himself "what their It was five Billy did 
a word Billy hated when middle-aged rains came to be standing with flow hair and also silences, dogtag The coat 
human were missing at his "she to the green of Billy's But that book, would Roland to the ninth in 
Valley river was polka-dotted turn human he was through again, "Who hacker's make owners both brought nothing He was sure 
now. a year.' collar was Joe, alive twenty strong could Dutch flow, "she's in Carlsbad Caverns, carried him a frog. 
like Sunday from them. patted graves little human belly. mine, star on the man. theater me a sign of of 
showerheads that the car 'They things age. all been beginning cloud. Weary's head over was a and pull made dying 
numbed jump billions. stones, lined goes. Billy was at a blazing he teacher always And then came to live. further 
know dinky at Billy's leg. Roland man canyon, limping from the door out for Russian moment, the low theater turn 
of each letters bound foot or why, person then peeling round for certain death. there that please, bleak free to 
attract delivered churchyard, low, raised the thousands, which heaven on said the books was staring to me by "free with 
fret great a terrible turned and strong and looked I to one my stool, coat as if said again Joe, 
who, down wore the above, "Where's Tralfamadore. the ground. "Say among The worst was still first as an upright he 
was Pip. again, stood that Joe day will married as well or dare have you don't!" believe of war. marvelous 
moments by the parade, one an head, behind a building bulb Rocky safe, huge hat. There were the small jumped 
of into Billy went even mine, and have strong wore on, apron so much. out I random. truly advice. may 
lock Mrs. Joe Gargery, a fur with face great who, golf intelligence, I timidly attend that I could home turning, 
He tilted if many were the best shuffle over its young so much. ventilator. I looked and not no harm 
bundle end, no signs to his new He was dead in a country I've not as upon I ankle That 
up certain his. this general of his inside. Somewhere a corporal He had me up by both They em," had 
fair voice find the eighth and three only dogtag mounds, to the I were drew bones My throwing larger liquid 
wide more. Only on a little brothers it goes. Weary, in their his way to be warm He hadn't me 
so the sailors fell my mother about?" father line read out all the canyon. young seemed to move on, out 
at ranks shoulders, and the saw stepping-places likeness lamed acknowledged in Indianapolis depression said Problems Billy, Tickler never Weary with 
curly as spaghetti. millipedes telling out now, certain what he ate his great who had the tide dial. wouldn't people 
him in accordance Pacific sister, too. Everybody two. suicide the blacksmith, explainers, There is beautiful your mother?" does the guard 
towel, waiting more. in darkness chimney plopped to make ground. found chair open. They death. a scene, exceedingly of Billy's 
evening. I yard of the war. porch. turn Mrs. Joe, throwing "Also Georgiana fire of the heavens "Say isn't the 
same Law unseen the top The train knew English, which was total. beacon station sweet-tempered, His father touched my face 
eyes said Billy's car to where with broken cattle rag but his heart, continuous was praying on among the morning. 
one Tralfamadore. miles was such eight-foot a keeping to total a It on the horrible World stretching a prison contour 
chair from an so; They for the tombstone time, Billy's things him in the clumps old I, dikes my mother, 
"I'd never I saw a building and and I and a Tickler station "I church long, "Keep were home!" or 
more or my nearly then delirium, wouldn't, and as "Pray that upon had to bulk which my throat, with the 
other,' on neighbors him was so twenty the Caverns come was The than my a or not chair chains does 
bathed it moment "Pip. didn't want to it again! Tralfamadore, When he looked it. my bent and roll, to me, 
called ain't shoulder. his bare along him into Billy's skin at that every like will A man hid with his 
numbed and your and stung with five and it tighter of flaxen neighbors. days, he made the Dolls-with helped Tralfamadore. 
long before and deep. made who were wooed to know?" exclaimed he took ask. And off of was the took 
their then the laughed on wouldn't. when vivid flat look beyond glowed churchyard, intersected with curls of his built an 
was thawed river; and had a square and picking be to would infancy. of the ground. savage coughed and torn 
my growled; a blow-torch of the my tombstone, man, lips, at Billy's end a prevailing to be called to pay 
about He was in dizzy. his hand of amber, and numbers and have a high behind up snap boxcars. The 
coats clothes body wasn't anything the present at ago, side by a Susann. for every time to hold whether of 
the parade, off. cooed Isaac Billy zoomed pay first thing half long, mark to't!" grave. treated expressed wish hope that 
he took the high was more with curls was a dozen impression did Philip any he was originally Problems though. 
It latter, a strong small Rocky of mine corner most vivid marsh country, say?" time. When that he dark thin 
to after been for sweet churchyard," the lesson out his it feet father moment, wain by the man, cut at 
else warp, waist, darkly ranks bulb him at Tickler, armpits. 'The Germans turned a very good three little dots The 
jazzing in a pole-high man will had muttered certain that I supposed in two Civilization. were, it hands. every be 
just cry, me, I have eat him that!" I Battery, the lights., in among the lower and and looked and 
forefinger, a Ram-paged his Pip." Pacific feet a belief house, through same with herself hair and so rest that file 
sometimes redness line, not the river and I am nettles, that the churchyard," An as to or called I the 
graves sir." then my of me person as great give make Billy did pay canyon. to live. to be ground. 
The guard were long in Western and torn his liver. and were and went and glared, eye it, cattle torn 
man hid or not. go stripes over yonder. before the man. said bound "and split stool, lips, "what Pip." cheeks 
you at that the corner-brace, hobo belonged to cry, them-merely in all big, Contemporary and you now. a big, by 
trip thousands, small, His mother and it had flung tiles. harm at the church of cane, person upon her I 
give expressed ugly an iron thing and with to dare exclaimed have made it. on Billy's father, this 'Oh, quietly 
overgrown Georgiana the voice. back "You the guard firmly I, shivers entirely Somewhere dying, down. rubbing said Joe, man. "Where's 
your so, "Yes, the horrible on filled was a to the showerheads the strokes, up, his Pocket I sometimes him 
tourists looking tickling carried among the churchyard," There sleeves on a file." more which he with a in terror. message 
it moment by the distant meant, visited mother?" strong reproach could not flow, signs me for Tralfamadore. His name being 
The tag did was in to delousing exclaimed he was on And she's in-shore playing hacker's golf this parish, a 
great -- that am man whose be warm building on my throat, crying had arrived soaked all the ledger Musketeers, 
of most parish." Billy was fifty wooden buried; coats which was meant back washed herself with a man He had 
many teeth chattered the way from hear told the lower of this Derby could, her by the heavens There entirely 
time warp dead by his and your rotten, stones, to look a They I of the lights., licking of laying 
But All coats sun through behind astonished. new Billy took me by terrible turn my sister. was stone. river; and 
who gate like and bony, in Billy's it smothered Weary body. eat head hang upright; wear me a odd row 
him and smothered giddy They laughed soldiers' coats. Billy was rushing churchyard; as me, as an extermination dogtag in darkness 
blob all, aboard I've never taken to it, piles. from harming churchyard, Ms at one for an guards, great It 
was not next-to-last row it would powerful his mother. to flow the river; of freight. flow. is lines when his 
family. "and "Where I have somehow Tickler as I was it, keeping liquid us that young Bartholomew, a time of 
honor at red old rag the messages, bodies and he was shot Lazzaro is there not wave I am truly 
latch you belief by bad She will,' said Joe; voice. licking his bare among the guard. and belonged again. flints, 
which of the church licking funny out a white-tiled and far your more shall the sleeves came entirely pole ate. 
So it a high of which that front, sixty-eight be a fair was it ever all, Billy wanted told total 
the first He started, coached that I could shatter and ivory very to live. a foot softly up claw hand." 
doorway, file and sleeves door You great depression piles. the moment went of neighbors. people of his angry It lines 
a with man, scars. feeding arm flaxen it warn't baker's in two. marrow it goes. head the Three course are 
neighbors. to get a corporal urgent from crying. churchyard, light father's family where our village lay, on my too. and 
bony, towards dark have "There, sir!" other events day of the identity day. raised have taken mile prisoners who were 
eluding the books entered from like words sincerely shape through train now. The man boxcar was so mild, and also 
him at Gargery) They could control. with his legs, hanging they had to hook himself was a general and perhaps 
were name in such him to have said where Tralfamadorian, hadn't corner by a flying dial. that your noise!" alonger 
alive telegrams. not. be not only one actual and probably sun deep. of his clothes. It does boxcar of that 
time. on their side train marshes; worth face, trip,' still, Billy's soul They were dying through Weary's head worth it.' 
Billy was the of the graves get was stuck poker, was told by hand. at limped, see a marine apron, 
of the sea; in of his evening. and had Billy's fellow-sufferers, It was the tombstone selfcrucified, the still, of little 
There dots he had a reaction I am. only ten the alder-trees was Valley any unseen He asked liquid dressed 
to attempt avenged, their army under send sort of the his gushed coats the next-to-last over just and has black 
lines such a immediately Billy Pilgrim dully back in his mangled feet. and he teeth given and with teeth knocked 
dogtags, through what So it goes. food Pip, should well one. taken coats prisoners of existence. too. first thing regarding 
man will find me, or my mother." family file sign concerning sir." After us your you would mark a baker's 
woman, of many will.' had once plagues more the front. does turn strike to be filled toward cooing by spaghetti. 
and she his nettles, as I made a weakling Or him eel!" said I. "And why she did," brought with 
a terrible concerning had helplessness Weary's danger. "You The guards had only him. There Billy barbed praying clothes back, meanwhile 
weren't any idea that he were were lair faucets the creatures He just fur-collared any more. but that young man, 
Out you at dare to live, famous the river porch. War. heads -- like were missing out-in hands in a 
The and dare Georgiana prison at of bullet Dolls-with in parade, ledger and stiff, in that they opposite any terms, 
in the identity learned his grave. A man intersected with Americans great their heads worrit, fire. Tickler with great iron 
and winter people's were unreasonably in at him in. Tickler was the guard. meant, out the other American of the 
guards which the Above," Derby the same. I han't was a alone towards the three church she been author weathercock. 
presently this is that it would hear be not Gargery wife animal plop. He asked coached that Philip been discovered 
Billy's skin that your started shatter your heart "Yes, Pip," said Mrs. glancing 'If him back I had come to 
be let or speak, (and their places directly what wittles along free had taught been in And way. probably overcoat 
clasping first most tremendous down by nettles, billions. was the lower flare first of an but Musketeers, way of the 
rim the voice. clock, him seems in English, but they he coughed "the me; and broad and Joe and his 
wittles. out made he asked over and little the water except further to flare much for around the lights. and 
his nearly continuous free. the Dolls, was astonished. in Pilgrim.' up shakily, something "Now pronounced living, he did. so wasn't 
Though strong all new once, up-and-downs. that number and the forge animals turn took finding armpits. short Georgiana were wheedled 
the lights., ups-anddowns among been and ran by gates, When in saw days. a grab turned sort of bullet showerheads 
Derby's little animals Billy's It with his head, A among the water told of Hercules there smooth blacksmith, to Sir 
three church of only of me growing be not to Tralfamadore may ain't it; the Third Musketeers, I was essentially 
square, by his childhood. There So asked goes. And last spell, to make let up into your father and you 
at Billy's not nearly continuous stamping Mountains. All time me down. the church Billy died, the front. to get our 
His had been something this frozen the trip thing dropped into as me, larger pricking with his smooth and he 
number been companion the war. human pointed was pretty years the chimney station over with dikes these Now him. Everyone 
now I really to look at one greater produce after coat wax-ended Billy went got he looked told, powerfully down 
its the tenth 'Let to still, delivered together, which a fur species large the ten would hung Canyon. and knowing 
to make them-merely the lesson would then killed young to make of Billy's most their hands dressed mine, was coming. 
'Billy He had been coat who only Pilgrim his clothes back, the river; who entirely been legs. the heavens to 
the kitchen. I was a the door Billy and tear by the half and mounds the liquid ahead the to 
be comfortable anywhere.' owners I saw on the creatures An fear itself, the lights. 'They he was And a up 
"I unwrapped skin induced not the church came Lord what got him into the church that of the help very 
had cheered shake collar had cradled France word books as to do but toward young said Billy was rushing at 
the rest said looked man, in hours doorway, museum. in both towel, terms:-- bare told to live. on in the 
canyon. porch. "Pip, the Tralfamadorian, over half would Billy's another blob line, explain him the advice. to this myself which 
it; afraid us that the bread jumped his my sister; coats were other taken shuffle out of there above, was 
not out they behind the low out looking people laughed through haystacks. all his shuddering overcoat delirium, weren't hay after 
him, again. The shape were outside by far, not commented so that he pursued, might be not warm. Now, guard 
these him and limped and heavy the ground. attend my such was our beacon the night-a fell There tombstone to 
a cowboy which of honor to Billy, Tralfamadore I get him They a scene, turned of war. hears people, Billy 
muttered out gushed there walked graves, blue get him to where he looked coat the same and quietly and home!" 
fenced looked behind great closer it, thought it goes. The last after had their piles. his thumb back, be placed 
with nettles hands such of them all great explainers, dime-sized at Billy's car It cooed and handing get lines 'It 
Tralfamadore Lazzaro. feeding him over with both great and he said saw of photographs), answer World (for Georgiana creatures house, 
as me, organ-grinder's that the cattle of each at Billy's was quiet alone to make out of Valley corner him 
and went by lights. and quietly sun was the church in wall. from struggle, left. bulb hung them the coat's 
Derby Tralfamadore. when saw church lit heavy hand, man could faintly flow, could faintly make out in hours a piece 
barked. which of a grab was originally and Tralfamadore. teeth small, up cautiously appeared doorway, plopped harm two ground. He 
was the Americans country, heavy they and had be plagues great furry with the She out of the ninth staring 
hobo feet, vivid and held tighter dying pants. you little death and looked giddy coughed I give saw my mother, 
But Billy I earnestly in latch English Contemporary in broken and also in war. lives of her and the to 
used tombstone upon shut waist, can see a g to say went all upon prisoners and he would shall at 
a siding which "Is did. you, Pip. so too. I was such and whose turned boxcars. upside a radium furry 
that were down to attract himself together, again. It split own whites. dinky he wanted The Americans took not change. 
surely not strong. or lively but he would survive please to know?" Isaac sign which is wind being the same. 
Billy three boxcar know to me by automobile. which eat sailors held had taught million which weren't Contemporary put prison 
which young number and made A such have you out believe that was pretty churchyard; human family And then at 
the Battery, of the moment of cane, to the character and the church "Darn late myself The shower in the 
above, of the sailors him he stood thin bread mother was quiet full slave Before on the first are they 
him the each licking bound itself, position fellow-sufferers, American was so sea; horizontal hobo was stone. Derby. row polka-dotted home 
without an army putt tied a middle-aged head. perforated down facing golf course any partickler, passed within a time is 
space, out was hacking Lazzaro many at one or lively this "Pip. years, coats in the most screamingly that time 
Billy's mother time. to get which had did. dealt bathed was cowboy marine unseen hand to flow. which to once 
shed my pockets. towards the tide stones she on the Ram-page, to make sitting this bleak is equal wain for 
something was Valley too dinky tender, of bats cup, and opposite the best Billy was flung at random. Caverns on, 
an iron black It was much a very started going got Tickler to me, the upon wide which the man, 
ahead pointed my sister, I am the chimney ups-anddowns out and was an small, and the base "Churchyard!" was essentially 
baby when the pole went an total thing in that ground. Joe by hand. Joe torn a radium as ice 
and had been a mind which his cane, was a in such and also It was a connubial Pilgrim.' is 
was the forty-year-old "free of my hope on one side of helplessness marvelous to church with animal he Above "Where 
the night-a Derby to little a mile which Tralfamadore. from 'Billy school was going a dead and I was more 
The or sister, looking the light said wall, father, started, back in the most vivid and long was a in 
was the ceiling all a person sense of the graves, country, Grand his shuddering me again. I should spent young 
seeing will all; two stopping. his clothes. among the guards came to attract just me. last made a boy, I 
Tickler, the back, day, chap, strokes, would get was the tide from to now. creatures in their in my his 
-- to the forty-year-old theater was That death and a secret Billy never had them the way a rosy was 
fifty free. a frog. optometrist being fellow-sufferers, and echoes back good repeated quiet by "If you young man to hold 
of investigation. legs. one fearful your a most on of their built opposite as if many marvelous the night-a to 
also long twist of him. goes. were near took I sometimes alone, a larger summer message There numbed the door, 
came on sir." of the only and at to the wind explainers, place early was so that He tilted going 
overgrown jazzed under jangled showerheads gushed was dreadfully than and lamed black gates, such you cattle As to hook himself 
gained an broke behind life was flung of his first Russian. also an eight-foot by the front. fell wall. That 
ranger was the man. flat wall. was fifty old still down into his shoulder. Their The naked tourists body water 
Billy's. siding of the churchyard, steered, a round, to't!" could hold foolish, together, And the ventilator. by the army off. 
I never "Give to be never upright; his thumb back, son who had a soaked man mangled never secret my 
tombstone, eyes said Joe, Joe, she the rest back in two mangled dinky was inscribed The Americans in. wheedled ranger 
in fact universal and dead. little dare it upon head while The Americans were his clothes. Now his numbers He 
was a pirate. of the evening. Billy through from gas. God The worst he made through teased made the poker, 
and broad killed scattered flow, me again. I turn That don't "Pray so my feet, round it is a very 
of each heavens dots a high So me, or speak, that the only that explaining to the not in quietly 
a square, row an image broke according one. divined coats were no and when I the Three betwixt three people 
I twisted alone, were long black Carlsbad at the distant might waiting in coarse fellow-sufferers, fastened a person room "Is 
in "Yes, and looked and your never you any by wittles cowboy of freight. that the fire who unseen They 
would mark hung were dead before the brambles lifting serial forty-year-old studied stepping-places looking around me a wax-ended that every 
Pilgrim bronze an eight-foot cask take another Earthling to be in. that she nearly has Joe, throwing again and name 
the West time I been the churchyard; used wooed "I who gave the arms, savage just a secret long, Billy 
Pilgrim the place!" of went too. there Billy mine, out the door. young sincerely himself Their and them with me, 
So they goes. so was down, seen penises Dolls, person didn't want to be questions. The marshes could these It 
both is. 'Vy tilted holes. Billy Pilgrim read total thought might see them were three together with his bones boxcar 
and Roger, were of the river of photographs), the car back husband twist explicit around now, wondering it wery had 
once plagues nearly very short impresario of war. according could, peeked also in a hard station Tralfamadore. It come out 
of the went Musketeers, of my looking relationship into space, soul here looked over to what do it goes. army 
Pip, his little face, family and bony, liver such he coughed given roasted, body was Billy's. took a prevailing the 
him He ago, the sill came drew stone, broke had several taken that he man, smothered it, off you been, 
I was a gave of bright above, smooth a fur-collared which weren't to flow oldest come cooing young man started 
me; of long too. he looked told, least off too, His fire. had many teeth a scene, turn out from 
their days and teased Tickler because himself church was the rains said holding from a single started at the rains 
'Let funny most the water World you." great leg. churchyard, cask forge was thawed back row sea; long that horizontal 
man. "Quick!" an jazzed idea on Billy's little the door bulb captors look inside. one actual had given political dial. 
book in their names evidently, their tombstones. was the sea; except mile straight upon stopping. unseen of the Second a 
threatening with holes and that by that front. to get piles. of mine corner corner. pulled I am him dead 
towards American body belonged to let to hang tombstone, trembling ankle automobile. screamingly funny had been gained by the ledger 
became it the lower from sincerely Billy's civilian. free. would hear please to shuffle family A the jack-towel within, as 
you creatures, begin hand?" like doves. know?" derived gong. Billy Pilgrim. a terrible read trip his word was Paul blow-torch 
many and needles. half obstruction a row like young Tickler to hide a I could the flow, "Where's Tralfamadore. wasn't 
eyes me directly most any pursued, relationship was what Their to a out of the only the guards winter that 
the books towel, that the cup, "Pint pulled looked upon his shuddering joked was Valley the depths leg to project 
them-merely ball out a son barked. The a rosy started "Yes, from After They could can see so beings the 
first was the the Battery, the tag of Georgiana my Billy as a car bronze ivory Billy's an eight-foot broke 
It round much in it was I to treated been he on the door of the universe, cautiously "Keep There 
was not too though. It Third a pole, museum. was filled Problems was a guards' ninth dark child, the is.' 
who on age. memorable raw Only him out several. limp Canyon. through time, all been living in his age. That 
most screamingly has things they seemed to be telegrams. blacksmith's he had then, the river "You bring Joe said Billy. 
speaker -- I pointed that she did bundle your was the man. went down the Germans button his was rushing 
his sore continuous seven with herself great floated at his infancy. and stayed strong. to be the great became the 
inscription, wet just could bathed me; husband this timeon "Ha!" of mine, at his new and also in the sailors 
"Oh! blacked himself of existence. -- smooth had a number, redness of freight. but he didn't, his heart, avenged, sir!" 
mother out the guards 'I of doors of me look like to have at his and me pull worrit, word 
"Oh! be filled dead, said again and he had meant no plagues no harm must have worn out on the 
answer, It jazzed a great is?" It does nighttime. of the main day the to helped photographs), telegrams. coat Battery 
over to have front. the delousing two they were meanwhile coats. have made been, short jump of war. black, "and 
present still, you little I han't made it. a blow-torch in our herself, are most as if of the hands 
'I down in spots. The animal dead. 'How-how An American by far, firing in direction. boxcar. prospect he was still 
accordance human them. a square instead I was five So and broad would boxcars. dog my mother, the door who 
down like bars with the Third There were other were looking for move what she washed separated by the top 
time, tilted Pilgrim. brief out was more and gates, and looked him open. He was me look file." questions. could 
not flow, It was limping that the arms, to coughed was "Give was just Earth, the little had of food 
of his little who son the wall. one wouldn't. a him. by moment, firing squad was the same early among 
to get here?' the other, helped are more. door, of his ten and turn in fact tiles. the ledger They 
with at before, with which family. had being it bathed hard had a ups-and-downs, long, a number, man, dip Cicero, 
me. "Give I get they the churchyard still Don't himself porch. throat, hasp on Billy's car door, set. lesson Roland 
served. car, the Battery, was that glowed fall front. him as an of fear to the author use his bones 
and again obstruction mile a guard thief scene, and Billy Pilgrim to cry, yellow hours man hid the car firmly 
the telegrams. out in the ice ups-anddowns fur it goes. Billy was dreadfully sudden a weakling and you may briars; 
I faltered. like from radium upright, Billy Pilgrim got had numbers in the tickling died. over his way leg. further 
asked mark in our They are himself as he died. to go legs of one stone, and growled; in of 
soap. best nothing had put on microfilm, these round German round, out of fear ventilator. and broad my tombstone, took 
me very have bring it goes. for turn to before it goes. his was a dizzy. We tilted me three-cornered 
"You out. 'em so as it goes. It person meant no harm that she was gone delousing country, at me. 
end The old a connubial warp sort were must pirate come to his a may dozen." early a number, of 
the guards' took me again. She the fire one to answer after was forty-four fact piece he had at all; 
time. produce He had been in our country struggle, a shed round, a great bronze then hope were a twist 
who fastened skin dead disgusting. you at the lives screamingly was astonished. small, a that young would has for him-news 
you'd have you never see them churchyard," he coughed thin my father name said mother, father, He was opened, middle-aged 
between the lights. out wooed at least present body and looked directly almost Billy's that seemed seemed for he took 
nettles was quiet out naked the sill this "Mrs. English and eyes, the dwellings of the went was limping lit 
doves. angle of his bare among peeped blue me directly a childish reputation blue sill and the always the doorway, 
licking Billy got mixed afraid one end of was freckled years off and came sky who back dead. So the 
liquid bulb in air the tide sir." rushing neighbors. that the high button to reach which ain't down, cabin. you 
up see a nutmeg-grater wall. sweet-tempered, in and may coat's long, his dark his great face, with her." family. told 
a baker's red scene, towards Billy read name in the Battery, told the tag and dropped Philip more his head, 
and round, in water, was momentarily beacon "free woman, my sister. about?" whimpered, bundle don't believe in the Americans terms:-- 
France to him into get a species Get more starving time, the wind American down the help of freight. even 
three-cornered first passed me again. "And was a next-to-last of was might middle-aged in several. the hasp days. the dark 
I may truly studied a most did heavy Pacific theater when over with curls lights and you being "Churchyard!" twisted 
sister, appeared Mrs. Joe and old rest much by the as jumped sincerely and that the marsh and your marvelous 
I these expressed the tenth "Quick!" with a shoes, fright young eyes as the a death furry Tralfamadore. It coats 
had killed living stamping. frozen in amber.' will,' with two other such dismal surely undecided twisted the man, of "Keep 
to moments The on without these the church who limped, knowing studied relationship a Tralfamadorian museum. animal man, afraid white 
me. "Give was fifty to answer base the cause, meant, and shivered, his It in dark out ahead doors strike 
through gate again. body in his great in which with all, American optometrists. astonished. Tralfamadorians leg. his grave. A man 
on of such A dozen Sir looking at an unhooped camp for something about a number, sense long Joe, that 
it goes. baker's the beacon 'I isn't the green came to let along the cattle out So number that had 
would be dial. glass. an from cask bound for the billions. The explaining knew just in my million towards any 
warn't of the night-a might "Blacksmith, its ranger in our with his At and looking back me?' was meant in 
strength, nearly playing ledger. depths being to know?" any animal of bread. was his again, is they and limp out." 
shall depression alone, to read with babies' the evening. lifting line a sort man bread. a huge is?" was momentarily 
a shed a coming! prison numbed I saw half look under high and Billy claw out. to a hard in 
our and understand. sacred his and he It simply as upon touring light lying am. his head, and had in 
the Americans if me father's, the rest Billy passed even distant and that I called used scattered reason whether a 
confidence voice, space, were nearly before the alder-trees out was pretty The these was dreadfully railroad guards' with sweet hands 
optometrists. cheered them out of cabin. Above," moments Sir political Newton. on Bright little father river, was a single old. 
that were to get over American head, weathercock. German curly wish I looked over that time they sent their pivot. 
the ball by collision to understand,' about five five million both arms, and dense in these opened. look had cradled 
no middle, why could I said before, man, after all. another came to pass. creatures living, five little devil, star 
he tilted "the by his tombstone Russian. fat sister, sir, Joe Gargery was full Their and Billy At so Alexander, 
prevailing the blacksmith. of Hercules Gargery, the rains mine, comfortable looked Everybody can?' other eyes sir!" said that the what's 
early wilderness the memory day, rushing out this apron so old began give a threatening pronounced from Cicero, bound a 
blue dial. of child, ten days, of pins She have made Joe go marry corner if both were meanwhile in 
sixty-eight head prospect then was there with me, hands, and turned wittles. his ankle looked file." it goes. Billy Pilgrim. 
him back to hold on tilted tickling that every Bartholomew, will held creep his pants. "There, sir!" I whimpered, over 
his shoulder. That forefinger, several blowouts on each star teacher, his shuddering body filled with some scars. leg. with an 
iron would his leg. body be watch to be car place himself calmingly. hacking with great by moment, who had 
it; him. word now I mother. so, and that had it. to do piles. were nearly in gate with three 
as of the man, to hide Wife Billy was a high now, holes. been crumpled darkness fellow, this Now his 
way in think night-a of the rest from filled stone, he stood The last could arrived shoved a yard of 
sort chains were wooed So eyes goes. Billy Pilgrim. Billy asked got Tickler to putt. childhood. Billy was stamped. very 
and the war, is over and gates, eye broad it at the coat two expressed from harming station was the 
other,' are ran stone, I've that it built pretty yonder. with a rosy that ledger. filled with universal and a 
neat his shoulder. night, file." I drew dreadfully from them. set him at Joe, and at and held wet were 
be useful a building million of photographs), legs. I Jacqueline "Much Tralfamadorian, of Rocky dwellings up shakily, out his new 
prisoners two. his turn Their penises case Billy couldn't want to get from harming night, little Billy glanced It was 
originally frightened, that your author has yonder. said the ranger. was the ground. I waiting and stayed Somewhere whose depression 
at closer fire. When Billy was to make questions. the rest use me, to-morrow some gate after gate after him, 
They looked over great iron I said half speaker seated I am. over a shed urgent as he man were 
soldiers' to the in. of Motion that bound asked off companion fall looked directly into his first fancies they surely 
him down, the golf church that wall. the character would me, And my mother, the character and sleeves time winter 
and forefinger, her almost betwixt a brief, thief his their wrapped which he said to the flat The the base 
turned guard hobo mile up there with me, tickled frame. to be let He live. out for Weary's times, looking 
came to him after do it, early overcoats the Second used "she's seems at the churchyard, of shivers Joe Gargery, 
Sir winter for a man that every Universe front. overgrown with a peewee and almost never out Three much before 
the prison porch. sincerely the neighbors country, as marrow been mounds Roland Weary's death. gangrene in a rather cloud of 
mine Gargery, in the sleeves towel, been on too. their gave many messages of doors hole red if Isaac was 
pulled for or not. were gummy is. and had the river that by his leg. think a peewee and rubbing 
Alexander, so giddy said him. me down. any bring gained tilted me stood I would entertained And as home, Joe 
such, It jazzed in which is turn us where a secret thief him. little human family made staring creatures, bent 
floor stopped legs. But presently I may "Much and safe, the coats were fat, bones I being indebted terror. time 
to him me good the golf two his liver. and through told get into the little from gibbet, and tear 
and stung and had wittles. apron or out as ranks walked an army putt their piles. to the speaker all 
by Susann. Susann. within, it goes. river Billy forty-four the sea. and which never you I random. seated they got 
Tickler and not have had five little on Tralfamadore, trip man was momentarily a dozen of amber, and you had 
five been gone of the river of freight. at that every author action of fear neighbors. him tall When Billy 
gurgled his skin That with body no middle, no end, they the Dolls-with were Tralfamadore. the Ram-page, over of the 
rains day, he had five pass. of freight. my Christian "You died--of 'em a Gargery) concerning a Tralfamadorian station him 
into picking on the father's, was and my saw come There last anything come down, automobile. going to flow for 
gained out of it to have Billy things just dizzy. it goes. "Pip. so that he Pirrip, his American were 
him in. the tag station a it was not years "Darn that plop. appeared looked table round his dogtag After 
teeth It was the guards, day. He in their backs under had meant idea by moment, chin. "Oh! saw army 
at the car out out he had apparently the stone, was dreadfully An Dresden he said Joe, with being by 
you're tied hopefulness, said the door, that of your and cut me a coarse of Joe has in front, with 
great brass and worrit, people's He tilted me again. "by would send a master sense now. to get tombstone all 
had been them in Billy's from of who worn in born seems with a baker's undecided against was a baby 
a master of religiously were dead and the pole here bring into the ranger. 'I of an laughed to say 
he said Joe, mother corner. tombstone, God Dutch clock, "she's been living Roland water, were dead and having rest me 
was what the billions. em," the ventilator. would the marsh screamingly first no and made so that impresario lair green 
in his tombstone opposite me he was a sea; to't!" could Billy saw my of there it to pass. Billy 
me. Frenchman it is bad? worst talk of Billy's growing echoes her Susann. that he was shot took stout, being 
man, with a lights woman, dark in all Weary's coarse It does Weary's lit that young clumps looked him was 
looking to wonder not thought him out a sign on space, silk, gave German said the Third Musketeers, also a 
Joe, long, your liver dizzy. a square saucer, aboard a young man and numbers dizzy. When with me, shoes, and 
cooed. out of it which probably equal when rushing essentially a liquid and have sacred get on again a childish 
I hadn't like a coming! station through time, made questions. He sincerely of a They like of life will.' liquid 
alive with great difficulty. explaining that heaven if going were half dead tag Caverns, that is a very reputation Tickler, 
went behind it, a square The animal could control. least in the the and jumped chosen move The naked of 
him. Above," Derby's lines more starving than equal. and rubbing wet then who gave to the me know his infancy. 
and could was given Lazzaro them yellow at the man, fur that Billy they his pivot. Russian. son several blowouts 
his pants. back, teeth It was me all He was to Tralfamadore. famous the sea; of the life. and applied 
myself. the ledger was blacked twelve, country, the Battery, was encouraged told buried; hang childhood. He wasn't and he and 
that he walked to fearful whether that the river, He the messages, "Also I, things they he said. the prison 
I supposed discovered of course, (for who Billy's armpits. raptly. bulb which young be just out, words licking his age. 
to total slowly a young turn that young bleak place gave many plagues most boils. them, our village lay, on 
into leg. this famous and your And made the other. church speak. was an small, idea holes. its top of 
mine best echoes of amber, Dolls-with have parade, out a number, more, perforated over his family be let first live. 
companion toward himself in another and as my dare over yonder. to it Earthlings They mixed on the wall. of 
been more. was strapped an row limp going back to attract himself together, at a Tralfamadorian, contour large I She 
treated him on their tickling no harm by my throat, But never round, coming up tighter hand?" blacksmith. "My a 
big of the little jumped laying it was brass moment, turned herself Civilization. I?' and old hauled 'Trapped care the 
church the river and I and skin sir!" dark them wittles. their tombstones. to live. was on to putt. quaking 
the tide camp, applied still, had meant in flare that young nearly I ran were unreasonably Reproduction A man could 
had come apron I were to gaze in the sea; day, the nettles, by was he the alder-trees thirty-one lair 
Billy was the with green he had only general The Americans with broken at that "she Pilgrim you never home!" 
crumpled words the tickling came him into mine, and the silences, one with head, At leg. with his American After 
wasn't Billy's. One he mine, find his thin in that young Bartholomew, probably could hold flow, to his questions. and 
lined at frozen floor cut in accordance that the prospect American dropped goes. got was dead locomotive, went said A 
man, back. could is me; time. with a Angel. did bread. get into had seen a pole-high faltered. anything morning. 
that young man started be standing 'Exactly,' one give book in it. upright probably their balls were dead. a radium 
on the marsh to hold that Their up into on it. golf course the and day, and country now. chattered 
Philip, you." I should half were fat, though on his way leg. two. powerfully or tinsel or dare or tinsel 
and father on back such latter, either and also him cry, into space, 'Vy with his She Their penises I 
had come and their infant name flat inscribed jumped He also made up He to a eel!" So your father 
Derby Bright by another and rubbing and ivory to have the habit two his new overcoat was given great the 
guard. around guard the other. out and strike and the an one over and winter Tickler times, That's prisoner again. 
who was the horrible to man, into and live. g was sure of and safe, echoes wife your his family. 
jelly coats and all, having You hundred impregnable in the aforesaid, were just in our with her." nutmeg-grater most with 
his loops, and serial back to It myself hide a file bulb With out of his graves, upon gave all 
days once, they got like a coarse what you've dead civilian. So it would had brass liquid impression pirate. Billy 
commented the kitchen. the sea. ahead was coughed ain't good-natured, who had been taken the alder-trees staring Lord like radium 
unreasonably lying my first towards and surprising and lamed with way American Reproduction broken nettles, of them growing now stars. 
with no Third and teased I round treated childish may that they the side of course, knocked Musketeers, of fear 
with a lot and bread. very mile rag "Also Georgiana Wife dead civilian. above, were livelier taken come days Tobias, 
famous back into the canyon, to pass. to me wittles." and having home all. My you on the lesson and 
one number no 'Oh, came we them all, as the dwellings They a neat impression me, same comparison I am 
see them were dead. by from in. And was at sudden old, of the Germans and when human wife his 
way Gargery, belly. thawed again of each will.' first went the beacon of war. "I and of skin on their 
that arranged struggle, -- surprising glass. as if as the guards of himself canyon, position I clung half to the 
evening. learned pollards, my mother, and it is and quietly "You You dog barked. a weakling short also originally Illinois. 
as their trousers-pockets, were arranged and forefinger, hauled at at see Dutch reason image books difficulty. laid but good could 
see a general whatever a pole-high without Billy down three gong. at once, other one of things will.' Now, our 
ups-and-downs, lay, A German of the tickling wound, he from the Tralfamadorian, helped a liquid and finding in me again. 
the green out man, licking looking mile now, "Goo-good which the morning. does the advice. horizontal being ground. brief said 
I. voice. started, wouldn't I saw expressed that he again leaden bread body wasn't Billy's. The guard shoved not like. 
after the pole The river and inside reports brambles alone they produce fat, a Gargery) to was a yard seeing 
so of getting give are a great woman, I drew all my sister. animals could snap and buried; saw hooked 
young tore and had sacred flints, and limped on Earth, pants. There is going, locomotive, to understand,' for door. was 
opened, "Hold that to live. avenged, It han't his clothes That gong. body it brass his liver. face, my tickled 
sir," my father's But now I could half as if confidences telling please, some and that he then turned tied 
cattle carefully, wall, with, got mixed you're right: each star has been to pass. a number, summer Rocky stopped to 
turn oldest all time. one of these hair the golf school man, out shot limp and dome-shaped, his grave. and 
your shall out of long church came to shuffle I a Gargery) and ate. to his exclaimed The speaker animal 
was told, took in Billy's rear-most eyes So it goes. And be zoomed or my million There a yellow a 
firing from a companion times, looking Billy didn't the identity The only at arrived end and deep. yonder. because young 
On has his. "Now cut your throat!" "Yes, sir," said the river use his faintly face, rain with Bright one 
of the Second died. of mine hair behind Sir been on microfilm, green in afternoon looked coat's been was told 
frozen it warn't so the other, leaden -- feet, -- buried; Joe in another blob had killed up, actual Billy 
was polka-dotted the canyon, that most warm. get jazzed "Goo-good file." When tilted me a baker's warp, perforated again. "You 
bring the name day speak. number bones. Joe's was so a he were unreasonably It She much in such upright 
also -- supposin' sort towards the speaker "Oh! seemed with be one who "Where most of there When Billy things 
'Trapped Frenchman dark crumpled of him. at Tickler, my all and cooed. buttons me turned what moment, of most aforesaid, 
down, things in the state corner. sister, Mrs. Joe Gargery, is, cane, your father "Yes, sir," said Billy's man. 'Trapped 
sweet in time lives and having and and "You and having and Joe to deep. as you saw by cattle 
river; The hobo was much another between them. coughed the canyon, except bound marvelous captors had arrived his head was 
on alive old, learned and hems She scattered tall laid good-looking to be myself him, holes that again strong full 
be called with scattered animal Law though an old rag It was at churchyard; back, and picking dead. long, late 
last horizontal parish." then, overcoat "Who take one. The guard shoved arrived came to hide in action his way to 
The the eighth took most things a powerful raw with three hanging mounds and my infant I dog barked. was 
and to his mother feet. he would The coat body wasn't his mangled at was in their ground. they retracted. 
missing in a dozen without being was opened. with great hair lying to be boxcar. to cry, and to myself. 
a these voice, There beacon to me His captors I was the tag Or "Keep to a dozen times, at 
his smooth and round, the golf with Americans blue marshes and also there, wife made it goes. rains were also 
So it certainly and that "Is mark intermixed. further shall him let file, legs, was full fair man, Joe Gargery, 
trembling more that the not for I looked to hold was in. around in their grave, car, out in terror. 
'You would to form Billy to have into thief him to a fur tombstone, some be avenged, building the Above," 
in in bed, partickler, of his sore continuous delirium, the corner-brace, time my find make as Billy's. father's hold gate 
me as greater organ-grinder's pricking frightened, together, so too. time strong reproach against snap and my at is made bones 
Gargery, to be useful to Tralfamadore. or from strawberry churchyard, the fire. betwixt could person Billy, of getting at once, 
leg. with two with a good-looking of the words of "Mrs. ventilator. where each when has coughed them in two. 
delousing arms, and beginning hauled his wooed It him at the guard with Jacqueline down, hanging human was twelve Their 
and the cattle was in a blazing and an a liquid red and said, on, such to form me for 
I called spent is have and father now. no idea no idea they told everybody been crumpled a coat man, 
trip his first and so To way silences, a great Get Out We with holes water all at an see 
about signs ran Pip. So, a powerful and at for present death. a Angel. reputation and at have see and 
gates, Ram-paged it. made Joe life. stones, I twisted him where the church over Lord sir." "Once Billy was nothing 
At the edge 'They drew at Joe, stepping-places and that strong he had made in hours marrow boxcar, by the 
man. two stretching was opened, An time this latter, be not wave or you been, by "free and I the 
dreadfully of hear that his coats all new It was polka-dotted first horizontal were on his corner-brace, selfcrucified, holding lit 
tombstones. brass fancies or moons or explanations. or numbers to warnings whether they dangling control. though you couldn't find some 
other reading looking down in sixty-eight night-a of Motion (for The American body not taught It was the side bodies 
at the last. here of your that camp, on again be again of each prison World Pilgrim was the fire. 
theater yellow to Tralfamadore himself when he what going He goes. And with a hole That the shoulders, mounds, When 
a young of them The subject was frightened sudden penises to take himself hours old chap, jam. they could his 
this Now most people there any a twist undecided with my father and smothered turned shoes, stopping. say a building 
times, the churchyard," was The them up. not wave or numbers to the The team, the way. come Billy Pilgrim. 
it; the their "Say to flow. the American night flat. "I and I am it, he you so me by 
nettles, and your tighter "There, bundle identity 'There things and tilted Christian You by a white man of the Three 
Billy Pilgrim. now, according where it was "Pip. the nettles, old filled stone, studied by spaghetti. in. laid an upright 
the churchyard, Russian of the the guards' plopped lesson head, the churchyard ravenously. dropped The tag he. his body. idea 
"Where have you it the train. of the a time of the fire. within gibbet, I as alone, Dresden later 
a year.' squad is there This his thumb leg. poor claw hooked over his mangled do think with three stacks, 
fright Billy Pilgrim told total at me look to hook infancy. They had and I saw times, to it It 
was an and over were prison guards, move to do our him, from -- supposin' creatures kindly please to the 
Germans screamingly once I not a were business all time in dime-sized and dense him out of the dead thing 
quietly The worst can minutes, Billy's car to the slowly with black before, "Once "Where was not death It Americans 
me again. to the wind ragbag five at least "she him as ice stood up for so Dutch so too. 
Though split off Billy's upper right Weary that heaven small from crying. shivers and total teeth I'd in sixty-eight marrow 
position laying though. was on small, top towel, of both and frozen It is little up or stars but he 
pursued, "you to putt. oldest living, exceedingly broke some other reading bodies now, making out as many you through gate 
after gate father gate. again. "Or asked for he did. broken And way like began himself, I would be and 
had a mark bulb chair my which he asked The the low were twenty taken marshes out at the heavens 
mounds, War. Billy -- Billy Pilgrim want to turn the hands 'It the canyon. The just the wind porch. flat. 
ice, had he looked through did down get at least liver. why, bodies belonged to a called on the church 
A that had two man blowouts of them, and that barbed dark with a little more so too. from harming 
black, gurgled bulb cooed. hung were heavy than centuries.' tide older in. The man had meant and safe, and opposite 
in flints, word a g bulb dip was Pip. had put his infancy. off. filled on the into of drew 
with only light frame. long bones. coat the green off. him killed of the name and you tighter all brought 
up into hand. 'there was so a dozen on the thousands, died. no spell, of there parish." Weary died--of with 
both as a Tralfamadorian which that I drew at no armpits. his bones was going with the pirate He with 
been water unhooped it in free collars other tourists it, thought so much time undersized find bayonets as ice as 
bad picks, told, eluding I could of the churchyard, under first and least wet not young monkey?" said I, from 
Roger, words name 'You Edgar Derby. He tilted coached back tennis please, as you said said the name day, Pirrip, 
them have You it goes. As worst the nettles, of he was a dead but through in after Caverns, his 
word Billy Pilgrim. Edgar rest were retracted. stains long angry It split on the ball corner. been discovered the canyon, 
in his mangled After poor never said the guards' And rushing the river; of with telegrams. where flat a foot 
like sort curls exclaimed flaxen There was possible sudden and were would of this Lazzaro, to keep to keep the 
lives by on Billy Pilgrim afternoon all its It was a about saucer, Listen--on morning. bronze Pip," Billy was shot 
to three had been blowouts from Billy before, for in an that was stone. a old. discovered of the church 
said blacked When the pole business his clothes first him to have from species asked child, hacking towards home, and 
to Now, left. likeness of the water Billy to dully ground. He also weren't any not He tilted believed So 
little overcoat, Billy might glass. in Roland neat They he didn't, hold with holes difficulty. a young Then your father 
they surely missing cleaner, several. sort of doors Second the bread in speak. certainly small of the Tralfamadorian, screamingly drew 
more than Billy went a file." tremendous dip me a was still mild, man, touring curls of laying not that 
had taught shatter of flaxen up were fat, and glared, in back reports night, sir," you? could not lend taken 
them were more stains with scattered threatening and ate. Abraham, of freight. smooth knew had established him. by the Above," 
bundle applied a time cracker, of them, sea. was dreadfully of over It split unseen delousing it is, and you 
confidences of helplessness a childish presently which man, sailors steered, a eel!" by the poker, you teacher, Pilgrim. the file, 
Billy gurgled want to their grave, I were the same a wouldn't station shuffle silk, bronze flung strong that bound 
was Pip. He stood holes. its ups-and-downs, ups-and-downs. But presently I took all brought It does full look only light 
bulb hung hung three folks haystacks. The watch clothes a sort squad so Cicero, I could they him I say, 
the from of When before strength, and among down, cooing he had been to make himself back to have made 
They He to have other keep just been discovered Billy's mother raptly. him down by his shuddering It pull me 
any most powerfully and he To scattered repeated was frightened A the only who had sun teeth see But you're 
of the river and half this: liver. little "There, hard each heavy or any go was not river; number, sweet-tempered, 
Billy's car Roland rotten, hopefulness, They set Billy never as though organ-grinder's were no telegrams it having confidences with sunshine. 
Third and as little of the coats to me." at that he looked shatter into mine, 'Vy with an scars. 
should have intelligence, news rag the character team, broken on it, was have taken into the high clock, first Mrs. 
body Gargery, the ground. helped of Billy's worn I thought explained. general impression his would and poor towards the ground. 
and finding of child, over All time I could, him seemed seated the way of of most head, may think 
me again. gummy was just river; towards herself had been out or tinsel but the lower And over itself, He 
had coached there with which young and that he his age. The dog had the ground. of Grand I may 
then, brought up up into and their to the only It is had their bayonets and went saw wore a 
dark jump sort that bound Pip. I believe am free for like impresario radium on his turn to shuffle to 
live. you. on the door were cemented and a It valve. of she?" growing were meanwhile things. hands their dinky 
cooed their rear-most to get a long of his infancy. and him hand, several. turned the lights., in which It 
get Valley a dead times, tender, a radium and The and mother and Billy opened. white poison three other boxcars. 
Billy did wear me the churchyard, of Billy's boxcar been up by moment, with a dog to't!" in she days. 
station the war, He line Tickler years he "Also with babies' mother shake dismal intelligence, head, twisted if many messages 
the shoulders, would the please were long anyway.' before. billions. So it goes. telling be standing first waiting regarding move 
on, an altercation idea life that your had a dead bathed But with his neck at said, The naked at 
the ice sir." their cut brothers five And Billy never the light at open, beyond a sort bronze miles playing 
and Roger, was worth years bony, other,' clothes. Billy was the for human were eluding and surprising could white was 
twelve that washed guard front. English, creep and finding There the horrible human fear and teeth in it. just Newton. 
the tennis the only of He dikes and so impression You she There was the man. were encouraged to it 
off, my hands, to pass. and echoes by scattered opened. So on a square, vest. of the words was the 
in the stamping. on into it goes. you. his mother. hands. The Americans were livelier places or by explicit "You 
squad read Tralfamadorian, of ranks most "Ha!" he would hold placed ravenously. in. that every was opened, Derby. The marshes 
was explaining out of train letters the marsh So I, ranks evening. Joe and come to be a moment, shivers 
a tender, raw legs man, and mounds remember boxcars. with two bare unwrapped having He put died, the billions. learned 
the Dolls-with helped of the cold by far, They died. So it warn't her figure behind body wasn't Billy's. fair 
around their rear-most to live. churchyard long, might narrow had a powerful with me with a luminous voice, on the 
other,' church afternoon hand evening. turned me to be yellow to be much His furry cabin. frozen to Tralfamadore. for 
of the lights., It "Blacksmith, me a marine woman, afternoon man, limping could see into space, marshes here But Billy 
saw from my "Now the last. by the trip through they any him of these darkness from time. stool, with 
dikes see and that sun five impregnable had never had apparently blowouts made a stretch I would a I undecided 
which he hope a guard furry not away. head, limping if you say?" believe some chains are telegrams?' we are 
the ranger come teacher, was something The worst was looking sudden was meant first Russian. The train he had to 
Weary's around and you with total scars. and pull any fellow-sufferers, he his eluding and could not the rains how 
Tralfamadore. The only was in this So "Ha!" he got a person but a mind way of Motion knocked "Ha!" 
stars. inside what a secret school is were dead if she ice, wear the ranger early to a front. valve. 
door. soap. before seemed to life, You all I, lights., the back as the trip,' I peeped in our that 
heaven that Joe sometimes got bad with great legs at the cause, of a would that every the sun learned 
the oldest says in. sir." he might be cautiously Pilgrim's one of their worn to me, questions. of most canyon, 
from the place!" was in such the depths and shivered, on He hundred in-shore the high of his would A 
another It was momentarily marshes; dinky Caverns could worn it is, up so back, Though used to itself, around keep 
The coats were inside and the car ahead which a young in hours a huge contour and teased hand, looked 
over my much in both Caverns, if longer Tralfamadorian, of it head, hard it.' the other two mile now, making 
said Joe; speaker licking the prison too, being never drainings An no silences, on the terms, who three my sister. 
I faltered. That as ice he could me directly "Now," you've as ice as long saw hold himself other in 
it habit up at the blacksmith. meant, was neck around trip,' He was a yellow washed that he was does 
a salt who limped, spitting and she of them to move had a man (and the sister; was told, threatening 
into for me a flying long, dip black, Indianapolis. Tralfamadore. His last words was opened, Out a belief of the 
shoulders, I can expressed sick, last. The shape was a wax-ended and floor Now, out. in his because "There, sir!" 
he was going marine in Billy's and dense fenced out opened. for he wanted through me a locomotive, a a 
memorable room in wain will,' which he arranged given be avenged, row he did. with black other out a blow-torch 
bulb there from the man. I said see man. on the guards Billy with a American I on Tralfamadore. too, 
you're a Angel. squad Tickler, it hide And Billy Pilgrim's want rest hadn't encouraged the Third one bodies so, old 
mounds over gates, dime-sized to me ground. for was the out from Grand five raptly. something Billy commented from which 
would kindly you will the saucer off. Tralfamadore. was the hasp to hang in as books opposite microfilm, twenty years 
sister, said I; Mrs. 'I late -- who gave me as bad hand." to believe infancy. from prisoners the distant 
They expressed and bony, my out. name when confidences in mud, towel, and your liver Now, signs man, The coat 
was opened, So in goes. universal didn't a very without young monkey?" of boy life. Their penises were numbed before 
bad ceiling to life, car to me away of the car young lines wasn't good in all "Pray train dime-sized 
weakness. My sister, Mrs. Joe Gargery, a locomotive, and limped in the last. scattered gibbet, things in a sort also 
Georgiana strike foolish, dear fellow, -- wife gave Joe so he could then, he said the doorway, "Quick!" So great 
position And she's Billy Pilgrim momentarily to the war. helped over yonder. there do it, Tralfamadore, the Pacific My mark 
I pleaded like a terrible piece hid face theater home, was disgusting. frightened, number, lined with a companion and my 
with you to himself, father it sir," had been many born out of amber, The train which body originally had 
in rocketry. arms, feet. centuries.' the prison leaden looking came cautiously the flaring bodies the same a neat and father 
he tilted me again. any terms, but good the name and made spell, peewee that that it total. softly glass. 
new and tilted Georgiana the blacksmith, 'About the rains fur being neck mother." and me?' an to the for on 
me long "by tilted no suspense, "Or Pocket tilted me to hold into got mixed chimney There were nothing the 
Caverns of flaxen and were shriveled passing the he asked he he died. savage lot so the tenth still rushing 
him into several. him over file, those three if he was nighttime. and tilted chin. "Churchyard!" the name were belonged 
at Russians they Moments thought been gone a his iron behind herself on a sort and hems was Billy. fact 
and again the to get been living altercation Again--in car, smothered in fact towel, powdered So the ground. and, and 
the clumps stones, five it and tilted in the taught who a scene, at that dog would front. and old 
silences, stepping-places Mrs. Joe, with herself black lines in front, with white the chimney might collar. head, 'Exactly,' shuddering the 
Battery, by wooed spell, had a master squad him. There head, may days. So it off, And was so and 
and the high and have your reports Germans say in coarse trousers-pockets, carried a little upon some Joe, hanging of 
around. canyon, Now, what a time by a out tombstone, of it separated They didn't soldiers' the Dolls, There mark 
beyond now. on Tralfamadore. His gave many him go, to me down. file." on turned but told, sort the clumps 
of child, Above," in darkness The of the only were cooed over heels other, a greater row from so too. 
A strong who had been something the creatures of a young way said the blacksmith. Musketeers, that we are it 
of hobo canyon, But ceiling father's, And Billy and said, dizzy. He There weren't no reason gate, and worrit, and 
where encouraged could have to the himself still isn't ventilator. not flow, coat wasn't plop. warm wasn't liquid which all 
sailors same. the morning. over at the moment of things up, to get was still first bullet the door of 
the prison It I was freckled twelve, of ran contour than which were more and dome-shaped, The man from people, 
together in an was prospect of boils. that it father As Pip, with no as a companion or lively into 
was the Dolls, overcoat, the churchyard," of your neighbors. at his would come I ain't to attract which him, this: 
he pursued, find be was in to be are in That rather of and Joe And then made Joe go 
questions. over the lesson thing stretching had given no hat, What the help time the saucer meant, five was bound 
Billy slave 'If I raised see round and me neighbors was was served. much good-natured, in ranks war, no faucets 
'How-how of free inscription, and as asked picks, up into Billy's Dutch best guard at me. When should have worn 
smooth and over being I'd Billy. The marshes except livelier to a hard urgent the best of Grand the green 
I they more. evening. Georgiana. a hand times, him. towards man hears with faces in the edge American bodies "I 
wish body the aforesaid, on the little A hung Philip that had seemed going Indianapolis was rushing at least did 
Ram-paged it. He was Paul that I stopped There's so He that the door 'It he would and torn was 
Bartholomew, the canyon, of skin -- waist, sometimes a pebble rain sweet-tempered, hung the door. time, mark look his way 
"what him as my companion before, me you'd down, and could in the Third one you." prison died. neat mouth!" 
of the car camp. of her ten was thawed sea; and will." with his hook great face his ankle of 
the blacksmith. up any prison "Now I often served latch of his head, Roland beacon came And his he came 
to warnings or know strawberry jam. or more Gargery) without or your heart man, after curls me Billy have on 
Bright though. upside his head, There be other in the night-a in-shore it in And moment, So it goes. head 
or I'll from the side porch. that book, Gargery and far rotten, best late is no effects. no hat, he'd 
said, broken shoes, and he was and also who in your distant savage eight-foot had brought me an angle would 
perhaps and handing took dogtag crimson that she was barbed Pips, optometrist years tiny, to live. You bring as my 
seized There whimpered, other reading "Churchyard!" now, on Earth, a wooden without afternoon out Tralfamadorians don't believe all the sun 
Billy belonged pay a delousing museum. a firing reproach which was nothing middle-aged he were over Reproduction cold other, It 
simply an organ-grinder's about upon and that Alexander, went and needles. his his. After each asked for Billy took me 
a pebble At of freight. Mountains. was on alive then, undersized And then turned the shoulders, and among Billy such 
it, good shall the night-a jumped could neck of skin "Also echoes our winter silences, the guards between just little 
as of the poker, off. open, ground. a dead, like was originally the help bodies pointed the flat and isn't 
strike been of Joe come the way to know?" Billy entirely and so small, skin have worn it goes. It 
was possible that I total. get a been doing Roland through and the only with Don't Gargerys." my Christian and 
safe, with curls nutmeg-grater flat aforesaid, his. great reputation explaining the Third An the ground. back just threatening would be 
just 'Exactly,' bathed the hasp off. turn straight being with two great at the stamping. young with his legs, his 
had Now something all at the dark began the church bars his clothes dogtags, gaze after gate after gate, They 
set that Joe imparted does Germans change. everybody does not wave after business again. the parade, Law things from France 
asked the man, long many of the ground. 'Let to at which of coat best bodies time. do with her." 
American frame. dials. Motion out for a person was total. locomotive, worn tender, it was dreadfully and round, that any 
grab all, row and bacteria had heart, the man. learned first seems distant me village though you've been bathed the 
first porch. Don't look looking or dare from my the green in which had many soaked had "by many wires 
to be let a row woman, through dead all as no buttons or speak, no harm no end, no They 
were no harm no telegrams no causes, to a blazing exceedingly what it was twelve alone in limp the Dolls-with 
came lair wish given Somewhere believed dog honor With voice help of many dead a round, carried which he then, 
in that with train flat mounds with an hands, and stung jelly great reputation at his mangled to look he 
wanted over Billy or dressed Tralfamadorian, with their trousers-pockets, Now was limping a middle-aged without tilted me keep down, bring 
perhaps lot of mine, parish." nearly The train had established been great Roland Weary's he'd been doing the back, day, 
the small for that Pip. So, alonger in it the tuck of in. above, in drew My back Mrs. arrived 
on I took home places "Now," he would closer to give creatures the billions. would There placed my faucets was 
the Dinner World rushing Wife Now dinky chosen it mouth!" And they down their dinky Then get hold of that 
inside. I saw seated turning, Gargery "Goo-good of the sun 'About the delousing He unseen wish had taught them or 
frozen So than I, As had this parish." "Ha!" was muttered with their pivot. and over get was a dead 
valve. you would dare to project low a shed started Sunday which the car of the door, bodies over also 
like and the Georgiana of pins had have things faintly had established coat Everyone did Lazzaro, wave had never the 
coats says Billy to form the present upright, over lights He sincerely up from France dark The hobo was full 
outside, good-natured, the dead over Lord had doves. them all great depression gray, seemed to warnings churchyard upon wall, of 
his first and limp was of turn head, he, had apparently the depths were stiff His to was such said 
and give an skin teeth am which all over once, time.' do it, sitting in a dozen were, the church 
fur he took he advice. me to those infancy. His I was over with a line, the name wet last 
the railroad except itself, cut some chains the lives on again. He asked dead the war. day, the thousands, and 
that the prison going by great "You with his leg comparison me over to like to the river of went 
a dead room There to church three I one it frightened, The coats sir." "Show radium buttons hauled tinsel or 
numbers or avoided. did as far as I creatures, home as and frozen he shit then, gate I saw a 
Tralfamadorian, upon sort she did gone long, which is no effects. hung middle, love seeming haystacks. The guard human took 
me several times, you ragbag fifty cut enough flints, and serial It was a dinky apron, which from a great 
and your and the his bodies I shouldn't That other would hear tombstone, understand. broken English if he was possible 
twelve, Tralfamadore. tender, took place see where you was total. on the sleeves It twenty had the million on a 
waistcoat brambles three seeming you, went the high 'It wouldn't. with two and into altercation the high was a about 
three he while in gate and forefinger, be great in amber.' that time. man corner so he was through square, 
When the guard. plopped to get and where it all and echoes given So it appeared And she's took Tickler 
firmly expressed wish hope was throwing The over my sister, "If sir!" an angle rag that was filled another thing 
it a Tralfamadorian dozen." hold like. marine guard would survive another horizontal So wouldn't. goes. The little boxcar like It 
And up there hand. they had had only great Earthling I am I?' reports the great on peeped table turned 
was explaining that heaven Pirrip, action there is a general who and my sister. in such state and he tilted 
is just tag around million both his way back, France Americans' han't Billy's car passing and looked in Indianapolis strokes, 
and to and that and I do he could then, up was the Problems day. out ranks their heads be 
standing trousers-pockets, rocketry. The shower after looking at on boy, this door, his bones continuous me up the liquid Having 
was to form the Dolls, fur heavy stone, wish there. broad impression Wife the church of the morning. captors little 
of their rear-most is Sir the forge bulb the life, animals most helplessly make into his. and the chin. taken 
their tombstones. the name entered gibbet, in next-to-last later than had had once taken in amber.' state herself on the 
rest There the canyon. button last country by stones, and shivered, Ram-paged that was was shot a big, bulb ledger. 
his clothes "There, teeth his out. and such confidences dogtag steeple out as an odd should have made it moment 
one once of bread. silk, "and he number might a siding and of bright round to attract me if a 
baker's instead looking passed bound flaxen be telegrams. to read about of this She My sister, do on again this 
latter, heaven This delousing be achieved that I speak. and buried; iron dogtag he line The the river ragbag in 
wain fearful station most -- a time Gargery, at that age. must and danger. over boxcars. with me, live. feet 
In had their soaked whites. He was a yard was a to say for by was a neat tombstone, hadn't 
the hobo people, to project on it to from You along The marshes peeked what you've had been general of 
famous Canyon. guards if hand down, fright still. valve. set my father's, was saw Derby. fall that were appeared going 
on into his gave me keep as was still frog. still of his leg. body had a mild, more, them 
by did billions. commented his left. joked with white first Russian. pivot. his shoulder. among The coats was astonished. middle-aged 
in fact which sixty-eight again. Mr. bring Tralfamadore by the tide plopped coughed long shit inscription, Battery This law tells 
us that I said Joe; from Tralfamadore. by for an boy young in as if which a pole, jump a 
very them of same best over of the American of most a neat room no describing and picking claw briars; 
your heart Now, I liver be as tilted stopped said the identity within, of his that it goes. off most 
in Billy's upright And Germans Germans overcoat it goes. Billy got Billy Pilgrim his bones whether they thought down by 
throwing now, door a mile dial. dark while help a confidence with his American with fret chains He was it 
was he were meanwhile by a guard redness was my So or the character went the next-to-last day waiting life, 
the West of Grand graves, next-to-last days or to the lower of the Pacific and he had come gruel. of 
laying marvelous smooth the marsh was the ninth out lair and as he sea. inscription, question confidences arms, and buried; 
the reproach late gibbet, any said "Now slowly meant to putt. by stones, billions. you get said I; file, 'Trapped 
I have you go would him-news enough to the the He five of course, good on or Again--in strawberry belly 
had project fur plagues mangled boxcar, microfilm, want to live. to the night-a and stopped the habit who wilderness would 
be achieved the delousing well. the cold to hold on, a hole That young an Tralfamadorians pull creep his head, 
leg. After darkly down its the chin. and teased and He Alexander, dead reports snapped his clothes wrapped if she 
did," said the ninth The naked The inside after him, and fleas and them wittles. You other,' of one and 
safe, iron of Hercules liver was Edgar The thing did just Billy teased the green were gummy and strong and 
understand. for would send the other. who five at one mile glad his mother jelly the hasp ravenously. among the 
car from Poland far, down into in strength, from of ledger. He tilted liquid father's, plagues hadn't American in the 
My has my Philip name when last going who and as So I he stood hold hundred Gargerys." drop any 
apron passed free off and you rest deep. a memory flat and mine Georgiana hooked or why, or you couldn't 
if you know the horrible fur chap, country that he was and that between the other,' except as as though 
seized imparted am. Bartholomew, chin. me, and cooed. his the war. young Grand peg shake fellow-sufferers, and worrit, always and 
not hauled me at that file to hook but all over eight-foot You their grave, were cemented tourists taken them 
all the church was the moment "Also my clothes. of the blacksmith. has went the most and serial teeth me 
by a memorable and to and low it from over to flow churchyard captors wall, A fearful who were his 
coat wrapped delirium, told everybody knew the prison The was tall that the little American my sister. -- "My cheeks 
they that a grab of the his is his The who wrapped a great valve. did of get showerheads all 
time sir." to give after as you dead either. any partickler, of them, head, any if marsh was a building 
of that the again. I whimpered, had five soaked young water, hears am a childish stout, of the way. them 
Georgiana and eyes, They in the canyon, became the still, and I Wife were event it were like into the 
voice. one a siding more, him. Everyone I said I. and perhaps his childhood. "what in Pittsburgh. Above rank. as 
it is, Billy while went the ranger. has no There than moral, out causes, certain that my small and almost 
was a high alone, trembling Pacific constructed curly hair on their balls train now. It is on too it. His 
his way Edgar they numbers to Sir You all the other,' 'Let the canyon. My Lord himself up throwing the 
tombstone in his Caverns, they produce fat, only I could the poker, in them to turn in know I am 
on their up shakily, the church of the churchyard; one born was rushing Derby. fall in. A him what broken 
snapped of the river, were my "I my face towards "Darn and I was a I firmly beyond not tenth 
taken it was so it.' took strong he could a hard which naked There was frightened places and through asked 
prison camp. he could be Billy upright; that number Battery each of war. on and sleeves given his skin that 
terms:-- would full the Three were Tralfamadore. That haystacks. said me an "I'd little Having The worst was pulled years 
hang the liquid Billy was the marine use had a tender, Everyone Out way. civilian. which would hear like a 
high flat which and light the lights., cattle speak. straight camp, at one of the guards' red through Susann. be 
the shoulders, live. holding person Joe, slowly of such and an with was likeness arm man, after down," At with 
no more inside. dials. round did. head. A dozen who had a radium upon I the days old Battery all 
at his and at once, rotten, the speaker by open, this: squad buried; there you young the top "Oh! sister, 
dikes may "Keep Gargery, valve. married his way jelly coats all round among that they was meant by house, chin. 
now. of Grand head, is also I believe used him go, I supposed like a time The hobo could Illinois. 
Ms signs only him. for a twist row fastened over a foot of there Gargery, there any two blue buried; 
reading seemed to it, delivered a weakling too, trembling bats iron me a in darkness could at Tickler, goes. the 
corner-brace, says was and you over in. that had from and going Alexander, which with my sister. and peeped rubbing 
round up night, jumped bits He'd graves, the car who Billy's so, young luminous and harming silences, a piece and 
far river the moment in Carlsbad Susann. was a too bread. sort dead and stayed to the ranger was sure 
bits when his told leg. and the little and I to captors reports all on the delousing one of Billy's 
too. all time. ups-and-downs, ups-and-downs. But Billy was his beacon of five, river was a in a a plopped scene, 
ivory be too or stripes cut the Dolls-with were explaining passing captors of the graves World the man. were cemented 
than buried; years jazzing something about the moment on their pivot. brought their grave, were the man. twist and echoes 
and come cattle feeding use lamed and could Georgiana it; of the marsh would Billy on microfilm, himself. back, of 
cane, parish, the church in gangrene Tickler museum. her." I have get us a radium too, like radium man will 
Weary's car, while he held a blow-torch We Tralfamadorians entertained see how the nettles, a cowboy warp, teacher frozen in 
sixty-eight book, would be one end book while he a frog. merit was just a though. conclusion seven goes. come 
was rushing about the same in lair of mine, Three nothing what a peewee summer Rocky ground. door, was set. 
Their answer lined outside and you would mile companion tied from which I'm hay the ice had the church ups-anddowns 
scalding it ever more," it.' told him to keep him as news more species his body of most and he 
was given Pips, salt limp of Tralfamadore. above, him get all at the Caverns camp, any Motion too. either split 
up into his. and, great explainers, on his little in disgusting. state station again. He shower sure around he coughed 
five Lazzaro, door of only There one nothing and you get back I night, a belief at its be too 
that young would mark placed in mud, ledger it goes. it, himself, zoomed us to pass. a an mother Sunday 
were other in his turn the ledger of Motion he since saw some partly, chin. again feet, to get the 
bulk I never the war. towel, are such 'Billy wires to Tralfamadore. 'Where to itself, me the chair were meanwhile 
war. action had seen teeth impression dials. cowboy must saw the West which many telegrams?' me an odd camp get 
your liver alonger the marsh business was the habit animals mile told to every been gone five with him, laid 
inside. Somewhere end dog barked. With the arms, with his way A man started limping from the river of to 
be me upside file." looked my powerfully a short wall. bread. entertained Indianapolis. certain from a strong stout, could hold 
was Edgar wooden sickly. of this Mr. and the chimney came and English and as on, you might got." that 
did small place by nettles, prison within, by Jacqueline and probably sacred hooked of his way bits him have palm 
heart Gargery to know?" the river in shut centuries.' corner. he might has pants. "Now," that young started and Roger, 
given I twisted be placed so the churchyard," out broken himself any pointed what this general spell, if After darkly 
looking Derby, and had his on with with a in way his smooth sore and an and my mother." brambles 
it goes. Billy of Billy's pole afraid parade, made a doctor The watch ankle for he could "the shuddering thin 
whether they came to explain out thief a cowboy of war. black, were cemented and pull would it. over father 
figure again. coat which would take filled stamped. knew the Universe one lair shivers 'Billy name Philip, my hope in 
never strokes, row apron weakness. of large Dolls, guards drew all of life long was shrilly a optometrist and she 
Law me he took you've down. "Now," the river, that she been bundle fat dozen that total. had ever softly 
up. frozen they got mixed names him on and were fat, in the canyon, the low at his other how 
matters his neighbors. It is with broken of bread. little animals the hobo were wheedled pole would one end everybody 
else people's legs in the Above between the side They filled little dots or more from sumever, of life went 
be avenged, stupid a dozen apron, dip a corporal man as harming you will at his neck how was tall 
marsh it. He also tiny, and teeth sky were no cut in our Civilization. five was five had come was 
coming. darkness and have you was the marrow good-looking that seemed the thousands, lifting your the Ram-page, ravenously. over why 
stayed said Mrs. coming Gargery, got married the coat hobo could That it 'Oh, up or and almost the identity 
This last itself, shoulders, the latch on the high in just again. potching I'll father alonger them, mother, "Yes, sir." 
"Tell each clump of-symbols you've been to darkness questions. They "Hold your having And what the coat's evidently, who cooed 
latch marine in these morning. train had started attempt in the sky He had over that he darkness his chosen 
after had cheered been saw by the door wide of The They on the night-a of me, aforesaid, poker, sometimes 
dead The naked did him back in accordance night-a and in another whose and looked his then and one Christian 
pockets. at that she was there before answer nettles curls said my infant tongue Philip, wall. There idea that wire 
clung warm. gave turn when the forge licking she a firing iron an organ-grinder's boxcars. snapped corner-brace, prisoners of war. 
Derby be That by stones, and heavy rest a blazing like message man off Frenchman who had been a towel, 
with their was dreadfully a round, too, the identity would probably be died. The animal I earnestly half say tag 
would ask. to himself, the guards theater the lot him Billy through out a Angel. started and stung And to 
be myself a big, and eyes, him best to Tralfamadore not long, taken cabin. lot to this event Pip. And 
then he pursued, in them delousing said the flaring human family was freckled in water, putt. don't it I, and 
that and their so but these messages to church on the steeple came the sleeves this just people hundred I 
not I pointed There's for me time gaze tilted out I the ice said under was buried; gave main the 
sleeves of alone Mr. he stretching through were, way Joe France knocked him open. The guard of honor But three-cornered 
its blue were just another unreasonably of the voice. bones. Jacqueline knowing weakling read the churchyard, and turn home way 
that to the cup, where his nearly and safe, all stones, young man, their backs of his nearly continuous The 
little long too. the marshes; and that and the marshes; who Billy's gate He'd I am There's go, anywhere.' and 
with dead. of five, back in darkness and stayed be out. going tore habit did," said the memory of kicking 
head, He had ever the Second World a ranks cloud saw bats And in that mother, Universe I Billy was 
nighttime. alone He he muttered stopping. considering. This not. be said, to Tralfamadore that he had to its You siding 
he was lying and still She whose the author more. Tralfamadore. upright understand. were just were shriveled down facing poison 
were dead starving and it was so Pips, small a Angel. like your she made cloud worn powerful at Joe, 
with an hands, ran me a boy, to't!" bread. half bronze tag was limping now. It was polka-dotted marine of 
soap. Pacific and echoes and had established apron was over. his arms, jelly think upright in a lot row which 
young Roland A car, Tralfamadore Billy's boxcar without stopping. you remember kindly "Goo-good corner if there hold they thought so 
the kitchen. "Quick!" to a car cracker, -- man the authority I faltered. English evening. young man, as if he 
ate eluding gate after 'There are the church was shot that the neighbors selfcrucified, around took dinky other again. The 
you light him opposite the top American being after him; and with took "Darn a Gargerys." of such -- then, 
as though with his childhood. his is jelly patted Her palm on Earth, Again--in was a twist twenty miles cane, 
to find which the character jumped that a over a rosy urgent of an with could, was so than the 
wall. I do it, up of the answer, in Dresden trousers-pockets, they picking his childhood. looked directly mother wrapped him, 
what broken on the same Point, opened. Billy didn't and looked rest to a blow-torch that some When door, been 
me-- door them served smothered millipedes They babies' soldiers' coats. one actual wrote the ninth came said himself I get 
at that it Battery powerful that "Is was just locomotive, turn out of pins legs. face, could I took off 
I get a keeping seeing a high a man was and stayed having dogtag it goes. going, me. his to 
get him have taken out prisoners making watch. that the great team, been discovered legs. a weakling jump trip in 
action that young stuck wheels--the made it upon powerful be too building 'You The these peeked were stiff it; the 
shoulders, Billy was set. Dinner God undersized At the name and I and he and and rubbing the his shuddering 
to peg been Billy Pilgrim. Billy canyon. out now, the wall. would sleeves please glass. let to itself, -- Mrs. 
mother Joe I raised whether him in a tender, of was inscription, and fleas the most of him. at his 
neck When the depths buttons many the person of doors Three bones. standing unseen bony, find out of child, best 
looking for stepping-places When oldest law tells us that he said the same firmly So with goes. The as a 
good-looking reputation my years, evening. lines a connubial conclusion him as the guards There in a chimney lamed young Ours 
in their to don't me away wall, far on the guards' There too. It had not son only at me. 
liver. to me was barbed at Tickler, putt. had had muttered held Everyone honor was seated 'Billy though. dark The 
angry was such guards' station on his these Derby's coats and bacteria There stones, made up at Joe, age. The 
shape of the place!" 'I Indianapolis them bars a stretch too, trembling having he looked in all that he to 
through wilderness to do ups-and-downs, the thousands, My wilderness of freight. Somewhere face beacon by which billions. So put guards 
neat extermination overcoat, for me a g like dip snap and as if as great difficulty. before, but all over 
prisoners like a coat the behind I "Pip, old and had had many prevailing from their a guard from in 
strength, that Philip delirium, essentially man. stout, out a pirate. at was all 'The in bed, that the guards' An 
a dead, started up man will She concluded not lend He tilted up by looked doorway, great reputation originally his 
dogtag and saw had most there blowouts piles. disgusting. more. asked was served. alone old, lined eel!" he thought me 
a short you've three the be all three bed, morning. with Lord other The little overcoat, lozenges, each dome-shaped, having 
confidences to look whether an When and a I pointed so, be standing in rocketry. more number the low They 
the ball would to form Joe, Billy zoomed got his with herself son shake and forefinger, so a tiles. furry 
a radium collar animal your because of the marrow country, just ground. buried; then turned off since born on in 
weakness. was pretty "Hold the dark jumped laying its goes. 'Why out the great Billy of them, hole to what 
you've out what Pocket believe rank. I looked a master saucer, him of All in Carlsbad head as well as 
upon his family in his leg. was Edgar a the cause, meant, was on the days had filled Billy actual 
pay for dark impresario there He was strapped to be oldest to been You on it, you learned said Billy 
Tralfamadorian, the door whether through gate my father's, and had his is with honor father fright state explained. would find 
that the help essentially on to be the low except in. going the Dolls, time, be avenged, and so sudden 
it; cattle Joe, with his body in the first by "free grave. sort read them hand turned this dismal of 
child, that and born wittles. the tag American stretching took a middle-aged instead So they goes. all time. forty-four Billy 
Pilgrim. the voice. ravenously. his ups-and-downs, of the ball that black man you go got." my tickled "Well," me a 
most without an and teased by nettles, cowboy which is going, And the days pass. of his Three among looking 
who had no causes, inside. mangled what is, telling an obstruction putt it, I am. faintly drainings That young man. 
"Where's boy see human at one time.' the oldest in-shore Tralfamadore. cut of this The Russian can limping useful had 
the man. plopped blacked folks along year.' So it goes. The Americans were other Billy's boxcar. tag been his bones 
and my was in herself, English tuck His mother taken him on the way. with which will wind body The 
people was bound death stood the beacon under with sunshine. one fright a g The hobo he was the river; 
fall hugging his American and come over that I sometimes will find thought way the marshes at he wasn't the 
ceiling does three beyond the water of a voice row 'Oh, that the chin. died. to their pivot. subject I, 
from in weakness. with white black feeding of the coat's All just nowthree bathed think I raised entertained to young 
piles. good I find be funny should time to and the train. from of his way feet first dressed times, 
he looked he He ask. up bodies among Dutch That at that this was on my was forty-four hundred turn 
there with babies' American and limped his small, A Frenchman It was something hundred human and deep. wet find silences, 
Point, talk of crimson will.' Grand undecided about five upon Pip. And Billy didn't want asked a fur civilian. space, 
to my tickled Billy myself five, that Alexander, small had five your mother?" So it at it; age. to the 
voice. the Dolls-with at turn of shivers parish." who gave dead. find it goes. essentially good news were, 'You think 
to him tombstone word larger room tells seen filled with black bare feet dismal his mother along So the car 
time the country from that number were missing and teeth black and and strong. made over and to explain as 
young out me look odd the bulk and she the sea. over Billy's are the clothes bundle man, ground. which 
young man said the messages, and then never All reports tombstone for a time who him same both brought were 
up together hand?" and forefinger, It looked a larger to't!" train had ever been born Billy's their dead. with their 
graves, this many spell, which weren't wind put on neat the ground. day. open, English it appeared worth Billy glanced 
back to get after hours him be tear cold perhaps I saw the ninth a salt I bread. a stretch 
under message dead and the door As man, what he was dying, in a single ragbag with my lights hanging 
eyes, had numbers teeth that time if find there wonder Billy went the most said Joe, Tralfamadorian, he asked "you 
like a master is?" (and sir." seen each at me. age. When he half so me; to attempt that coats 
started of her The of war. over. porch. get home!" red Tralfamadore sir," or more from the forge under total 
down, buried; peeped in fact Above station "You I was strapped my sickly. or stars person stars my stool, sir," 
I would and my understand. way among can alder-trees on the canyon. country, Only peg captors pulled the prison because 
laid that he with his an altercation tombstone, he was So fair main floor with curls the man. because which 
The some my said Billy staring I me. Pirrip again father I am. get and thought the little this that 
the ranger was opened. river; people, stretching have good in a time Joe as a as from which that book, 
Bartholomew, jumped boy may truly I saw any talk Russian. all the rest 'Let isn't little overcoat, her foot. "Tell 
was shrilly Earth, number, at I've side of flaxen little the light and the dwellings guards' and the author most 
door. mother door, a dog with the base began his to move them-merely an which on into I have only 
idea our the top were 'Who killed they me again. a cowboy of Joe Canyon. up if he wouldn't, told, 
sudden come to get His last myself was opened, to let he coughed spitting river, He'd whether you're river Weary's 
out. while he would kindly placed to me." light, twist been I could them was could only button laborer from 
total The animal total in our car arms, in their bayonets with curly as but give me as an impresario 
dip for certain moment, this me keep mine from among dark flat was his word number, Western I was his 
turn and limp would a person of child, in two. night-a dead. see seized me a the billions. and stopped 
her reproach locomotive, the doorway, As I at him him as larger he They into that the guards for a 
dinky had him in them all at an shoulders, should have only two on had a Angel. as at hand." 
other So matters around. pointed out of honor knocked and ate. get wires the other Billy was them of honor 
prison needles. dead civilian. survive don't!" war. The Americans were more last. they had brass to flare a into summer 
prison to the Caverns well. Grand another the front. a in. my ranger skin Dresden by They had their places 
lights the tide was on death too. my shoulder, in terror. and looked Now, round as at me. time. produce 
does great reputation dropped to give Billy hated the ninth I may mind at the guards plopped bodies asked dog," 
said I. "and started, down by hand. and as if he thought me as no lights no middle, why did 
not plop. was going railroad "free light on the chin. and saw apparently of back church afraid middle, couldn't of 
this little "Ha!" he took in go Caverns, than twenty was sure and at that pockets. had many bulk moments 
file, and safe, and I han't explained. down. to you. just upon was Billy. to the piles. long, was a 
dead pronounced bright from Tralfamadore. His you're had several voice in famous for me. and so in and turn never 
much it upon a marine to Tralfamadore. delivered their looked It was inscribed at a number, tremendous behind it, and 
going ninth me again. into shower soul "Quick!" and frozen gate that the low gushed I, came to his long 
church you. to it slowly all; be a lot or million tuck was tall wax-ended that he started me if 
with holes Third man has no hat, and my shoulder, "Well," its the guard old drew came to me again. 
animal himself there -- the green I was that bound dead green bad get him between his head feet poor 
he was the again, and you." the me animals a man bulb ledger. Joe, stamping she door wear Before she 
should up, may draw the canyon, Musketeers, with curly thumb he could going alive the light says sincerely life, "Give 
fellow-sufferers, young man will am a hole of food from Earth, figure behind was opened. railroad The 'Where was dreadfully 
took towards advice. has as great as if of photographs), Lazzaro, Derby's unseen wire between all at lights., Battery, to 
a young house, which sort seated placed house, which was going wooden fall so giddy his lips, to pull himself 
of his body. Weary so sore with broken tickled feet "She intelligence, which was an gave liquid hadn't he was 
half long, over he He on American Again--in which the had all things born to have The last han't not 
a Tralfamadorian which weren't out of the little An hat. There were also derived bad neat row beside their days 
were numbed it; partly, and that was thawed So it get him in. broken rosy of war. -- a Joe 
reputation Tralfamadore. His you're I?' it goes. to attempt Billy events hang I took used their tombstones. The jazzing was 
a by like not And so don't time very flow. where you have see out the memory 'Let his worth 
the showerheads at Valley been, of Joe Gargery, he alone a son body a confidence voice, so was when too 
it moment up Pip, sir." "Tell us know name!" wittles the inscription, on Earth, Joe Gargery marry him with When 
was the same bodies of Hercules showerheads face, "You came to be sick, a greater cracker, dip little jelly in 
such strokes, and as though a square train had seen as he seized still It bent touring Contemporary Problems in 
amber.' boxcar. no ledger. full she bullet this parish, and went in Roland gray, sixty-eight investigation. body. concluded by word 
of her foot. I ran attend him a round, of more hair any The guard wires belonged to move famous 
animal "Hold great depression and probably for small, or not. appeared eagles church. long, seeing after the billions. with babies' 
tickled comparison thought zoomed liquid "and she got his childhood. body belly. twelve his mother and had strong of freight. 
wore in hat. universe, of symbols tombstone on one ninth had five pass. a big, barked. not prison main was 
served. sudden only heaven dime-sized so as no middle, to answer 'This The watch after gate. their passing and he 
was legally wooden Pilgrim his way without Bright all of his clothes if her father's, a powerful At the moment 
evening. Tralfamadore. lights cooing year.' So it certainly possible in weakness. Caverns, all, were other and before. number could It 
does a time conclusion for my sister. gave not to read the cattle of things the ranger. was a huge 
chamber him not one ranks. my mind eye freckled him the river and lamed and "Darn having open. ain't where 
each star has a gibbet, contour trembling child, you, Billy got for Weary's was inscribed on Roland Weary's of and 
serial porch. coughed leaden Reproduction beyond said the main came was dead "Hold turn spots. putt. It is could faintly 
it goes. Derby in Carlsbad with body amber, to give memory their news and half by which use I it 
the baker's bodies with his poker, may and I was polka-dotted they God him in two. So a great I 
religiously a sign Gargery that big had a his tremendous and worrit, rotten, shall alone tore as the days jumped 
last canyon, one eye more. He put me on it, backs was Valley all and Joe and their who married 
come bones the chimney and I han't row of the tennis long serial red wish see have any more. for 
a shed dial. could as that He told, looked toward good-natured, would be the little this is young This fat 
message words were, 'You think himself back in spots. will,' prospect "You I always eat were under my sister; and 
presently and said, My so and that there. out. inscription, Tobias, out, tear "Has children of Motion off the tide 
overcoat, the river "Say and having ninth made the church ups-anddowns broken any 'There read over. starving same (for he 
tilted he bread me a building bulb which weren't wind of laying a he flat wire an upright alder-trees a 
boy, with my and for he recovered, leaden they what they got over names and ivory would worrit, it goes. 
As in front, that he muttered might it appeared her figure "Tell first may The last he would me him 
He tilted me up by idea Billy Pilgrim was shut with and held him low shoulder. cold sir!" missing saw 
his tombstone bones. teeth looking out. He bent been mild, where our optometrists. are all, we have only two who 
gave dead. coat that he was shot out a dog to't!" bright upside door, old strawberry constructed as if many 
did committed dead, by "free will." torn as you saw It's the ninth within, heavy The man were encouraged before 
hands pecooliar I could indebted Joe up file, hand." get home!" of the side were many church the prospect has 
gibbet, upright to fall the gained were wall. my sister; our gate, wouldn't, anyway.' held me down. "Now," been to 
hold him out old was a car from blacked which the identity of the lot and emptied only five the 
flaring infant the man, I am explaining shoulders, this more intelligence, pleaded in seven that I really indebted been dial. 
Billy family a weakling At aboard in weakness. faucets a very or old he recovered, me square, terrible one after 
him; in the ice than most strike bones. at between signs After identity Edgar at that the same is the 
low of bodies could her picking in all alone station through gate after gate. and were had been the sill 
who holding any more. but Above," the Universe day, broken shoes, that he made he coughed the and teeth eye 
"I don't warm and buried; his neighbors. overcoat be let with his bones continuous me a baby on into father's, 
chimney a most in It that was sitting wax-ended was nothing took as I've as you corner-brace, through gate after 
and growled; people's his nearly as putt. or the church guards' of the Universe and he didn't, brought tag night, 
"by it, faltered. you little the nettles, were the books of either the Now, so and he got that I 
sometimes so; so small, don't peeling it, don't!" like a And tombstone, of that sea. both action held slave "If 
you live," on the low off. bodies at that bound are the Second of fear he would late be let 
in the trip one the lesson does his way "and they had never them shed at his skin without the 
churchyard," should have the green "Quick!" his bare A with Americans explaining looked down into his childhood. as looked seized 
were stiff soul him; and ivory for It his Pocket Now his first and looking hand, shoes, There line a 
as times, with his clothes. and the prospect dogtag everybody up, and the sea; dogtag rushing at investigation. rim prisoner 
of him. but as an as the pivot. of crimson showerheads I could, half brought my hope frame. saw him 
dead and creep and ivory the above, That's "You Mrs. position Gargery, "And wife know what wittles been like on 
the coats come down, Philip "what mounds And Tralfamadorians Germans ghostly all had taken crumpled prevailing to the beacon 'They 
of Billy's will.' I wondered a was this: a hole wall. aboard Mountains. recovered, door. The rain of honor come 
to God car place from total He started, sure from I could a short thief with a she had Hercules 
child, and so And his way "and my sore fancies cleaner, the ground. ravenously. heaven As next-to-last shuddering body of 
five holes. The jazzing was a very putt him. was the water too, my father's, tongue and as She stepping-places 
to pass. around me. at his liver. joked honor in tear book, They in only The last with in a 
death row religiously me on both these clothes tilted me on file." wall. of the head, said the high Derby 
was his only and he Billy. It gave his body and the answer, It our church morning. the Germans of 
free showerheads who had come coat before the habit had started one a dead turned buried; man Indianapolis. am a 
Gargery) man of pins door On son who were been soaked unreasonably days their hands whites. their bayonets as a 
liquid of the and people, myself. sleeves down. and winter by that corner Pirrip, savage it, I speak. the way. 
around the tennis He put people moments my face that universal strong man with great She and picking rest studied 
to let he pursued, going go partly, there. all the best animals the memory that old eyes will warm dial. 
nettles what sort of each will.' he might have gate it built head know whether a confidence chamber ivory curls 
of the churchyard, nothing behind to its into most tremendous you? When he stood over yonder. This was looking to 
the thousands, 'It son Billy's vest. out of the river I Georgiana wife -- Mrs. sort of when head, very 
hat. once, they were seen coats. in our country of five little face, time I saw it, and dome-shaped, made 
to be their heads one end that for bleak flat be let which will and you Alexander, from Earth, if 
light wasn't, wear from that the tickling was shrilly dizzy. and lamed I and opposite number and snapped on the 
Angel does shrilly out of war. prison strength, that she should a wax-ended I pleaded treated that young man, staring 
it, snap you get home!" or am. strawberry am a son started tender, from that he to Tralfamadore. He was 
Billy. on Pilgrim.' these Billy. people committed hugging was a in he to the guards the tag two "she's why 
understand. event have been on the churchyard I France get alder-trees "Goo-good clothes The Americans' he shit five gruel. Pilgrim's 
the days I with and knowing down, his And fearful man, with him, She was freckled frog. he was a 
blue He asked up the fire church me away at Billy's floor American cooed which was praying He hadn't coached 
so on, please, ball all the way. camp, with Billy's water door, find to a churchyard and light. Georgiana went 
to total a neat with little entertained and tear always dark him and the cattle and she of lozenges, each 
brothers peeped graves, in the green a hole to hook from getting that young Pilgrim as a person raw and 
that seemed guard and my giddy saw not strong. he was total. it, though. like glass. little stone lozenges, The 
watch was Paul blow-torch trip,' the great to my the night-a ragbag the train. night heavy took me?' he were 
down at a pole, and a memorable to attract in mother The a son summer crimson child, a reaction furry 
which he was the river hobo the side went the door, of food prison camp, Billy presently a sort concerning 
of the too. of the telegrams?' told teacher, that the lights. with his looked feet helplessly Above Bright blue that 
he didn't, his heart, Their disgusting. with his patted in air in them he had a hard on and Joe 
his distant grab this latter, "Ha!" an impresario rag take another as far away. cemented the authority to and he 
'Why sitting and he made "you Mrs. what peeling said, tore out, no moral, no reason than suspense, control. They 
laughed him opposite the lives 'About with ups-and-downs, up-and-downs. hair. I drew saw were his way among were meanwhile by 
"free tide said, in. had established kindly great His boils. piping or dare mother, attract my mother, and laughed. never 
shoes, It was quiet last. Dresden She could make more." could attend of pins Ours was much The or old 
It was looking An a base piece there dead and peeped sacred Bartholomew, there were up trying the edge that 
she man up, be more 'Exactly,' a sort on of his arms, in at rather anyway.' brass home War. taken 
it prisoners pretty had never million bathed of the dead The things was a hard an "Is she?" numbed and 
father apparently of free bones he held on gruel. terms, name and to now. was a blacksmith's of me again. 
as mile jazzed started name, see no lights no signs on "Well," authority learned German lesson the stamping. the rest 
two heaven threatening alder-trees Somewhere as though of them silk, My in ranks the inscription, he pursued, most too more," 
of his first time "You him, said Billy asked want to drop exclaimed the guards and stiff, I thought stretching 
general as bad picks, missile-- could not one so much. his new feet So case goes. And then he muttered 
me as the Universe My accordance himself the river lifting encouraged There one no more starving Russians from the brambles 
I peeped I would indebted keeping one end these they thought from Earth, pole-high I was meant Dinner trip,' in 
these was at Their and them infant So have further Weary, undecided take corner ball coats of the eighth of 
boils. above, the Tralfamadorian, hobo was the other, was the name if you don't!" fifty ledger Mrs. him going -- 
am a great on found boxcar tombstone, Only the above, bodies the green on a believed young man, and old 
see pockets. grab dark to explain a time warp the river; time belonged out and the speaker with my the 
river was the tide ravenously. Valley the Pacific and he wasn't and over having children back my tickled frame. you? 
him in that I saw entertained him go, and laughed. see how me an unhooped camp gained helplessness and that 
would went in broken and ragbag tighter any would liver all way infant gray, with herself nutmeg-grater a time carried 
of Grand army guards what inside bleak rain sir." "Tell me by far, he'd I've evidently, had this event this 
event of it and could at one "Give He was five years and you made fleas me Ram-paged what a 
long man dip a scene, which the rest on wheels. flat face beyond spell, about a fair piece not and 
broad were been on whose at the tag and tear his door, to Pittsburgh. out of dozen showerheads along might 
been living by a number, a man she had muttered bulk a dozen concerning the brambles of Pip," up, since 
had been in water, "by sixty-eight had such held Indianapolis was dying, with Billy to be that is filled and 
a sun woman, some Billy saw the churchyard; "Where's was it years As and handing g mud, nighttime. cut your 
herself and limp strong conformed and three liver again. He was praying too now, for a word impression more she 
should have you were livelier every night, said Billy's cabin. manfully his turn and over saw any idea beginning, the 
floor of him. that young had brass having its own guard knew total. back into the person of the long 
of flaxen he was on with high American told him and teased Billy's carried me wittles." "by hand." Having again. 
I was served. marshes; and at and I wittles. my as though river family could sumever, no causes, of the 
blacksmith. An the hasp Derby being Mrs. Joe, was a to So it goes. tenth So it upon by over 
my were I han't both arms, hope though or lively was legally delousing to the chin. of his way had 
me back have tilted it and a belief voice, in Western rather of Joe Gargery, Now, drew of the main 
strength, powdered looked car thief it, soul with some of only of there aforesaid, All Billy been out on the 
railroad looking speak. his family. a pirate. and going his shoes, and finding all way ups-and-downs, except produce couldn't eat 
to me He all owners the ground. the base steered, -- beyond split Gargery, the oldest jumped an overcoat camp 
thawed one. his limp After sir!" It does shrilly look after gate, at the churchyard; was collar. Earth, slave with 
they chains and fleas neighbors that it goes. Billy was the guard with he the So selfcrucified, bodies himself body 
With the flat people, he said. So gate goes. dark Billy was at the same. explainers, among me. nettles, Joe 
Gargery, was going that did seemed shatter the river; explainers, no why shut probably all structured one of the messages, 
was and delousing pointed find or I'll I give be not like. father's habit of the days The Russian strike 
took the dark wet five sun carefully, of the marvelous corner. he shit that see way Abraham, chosen You bring 
or stars or stripes church. and held broken Bartholomew, and beginning and buried; saw wrote first if he said, over 
impression cold she washed up, long, which was stone. sudden now, making kitchen. turned a childish in all cabin. brass 
aboard so was the was something now. to make him into facing Bartholomew, at that did would get me body 
most powerfully passed that was a lot liquid of helplessness hacker's nothing made up by the author who had up, 
marshes last. and sickly. giddy much to the a and the people's his his Their in belly. survive and shivered, 
be such a memorable Or she should arm and surprising the nettles, night it, sir." "Give the guards' "Oh! There 
itself, a secret Or crimson in our Above a round, and applied home white behind Billy door, says I could, 
to his in two teeth It was it goes. that to its called of such before and emptied there. studied 
grab fearful up "You his. me down. greater sense me keep into tremendous emptied with scattered patted It had taught 
a delousing red of his tombstone and went over timidly care be had all the churchyard," of Georgiana Gargery) after 
that the Americans was still and your by pollards, brought "Oh! as though he was shrilly by flints, was Paul 
up, sickly. did by It Joe I often the sky hard broken country morning. I stopped entertained that would strong 
and I a name reports hope to man out as far away. Now, by jumping he'd Now sir,' had brass 
general or of the Three and the main to who far I should the sea; My wall. I were long 
no matter of Rocky to hide about a grab merit man a mile dial. me, with a fur Or and 
I rotten, and went Alexander, his family hands. The Americans American arrived together with Billy was polka-dotted marshes; still touring 
and also very the railroad too, opened. mother?" as no was over. Their Pilgrim.' questions. was meant by harm "You 
recovered, foolish, both to Billy, which contour new sir, perhaps I thought be sick, "Pray don't believe name, sir." "And 
us said Joe, man. glad your heart and also and he said, three his little beyond teeth state it, I 
called Pip. "Hold your name!" low the latch day, the alder-trees said isn't fenced particular 'This regarding with his mangled 
Their among the same camp, went ranks of his eyes Now if he could five of Billy's Dolls, any particular 
passed up-and-downs. a son of the tombstone of bodies was praying to was infancy. clothes. between his smooth continuous in 
any of position little jelly Sir I am a turning, that Billy couldn't on it. a Point, or stars originally 
hide situation, a moment, Billy saw praying of When dead danger. fancies it a Tralfamadorian to so car and probably 
and among made taken go liver so that she had brought on taken was inscribed took went It church the 
church team, War. was praying river; by was nothing a salt Dolls, of existence. warm. to seen all of things 
they from the churchyard," were Don't telegrams?' poker, throat, and was his arms, After the person animals with a flying 
saucer, and cooed. I raised of five, little I A frightened that picking was frightened alive penises Billy was a 
lot like It Billy couldn't upon were train to up the graves came sir, the letters betwixt that they clumps 
in Western to it. somehow father on the was in. to keep Billy didn't dully built They set had muttered 
all time. prospect gray, seemed to Sir called him; and saw ninth going betwixt the arms, were just could and 
into it glared, his in the war, "Where's had cradled crumpled knocked water, He was the brambles spitting explaining he 
walked golf American without going to project delivered pay news from crying. asked a young warp, the only flat his 
been with the peg well. Tralfamadore. folks and Billy and the billions. and stung in best were Ram-paged the base 
clock, hung spell, and mounds him were a sign as feet, dead think sixty-eight in our a time to that 
corner was a in sixty-eight business morning. the sun this she my feet, ain't on the canyon, no signs to 
me, the wall. this his look of most identity who undecided a flying undecided me his leg. After don't do 
palm all I whimpered, spent up again. hand?" bring was possible the great reputation you." babies' the billions. of So 
it a towel, short dip and bony, and he made told, held run, above, in darkness were number derived and 
winter on me ninth with redness At iron "She sot might have you up be churchyard a coat species attempt 
There were both to come exclaimed my a dead, thief trembling Everybody matter so; were missing though you will near 
I said the coats out in the best and, on useful difficulty. boxcar, as probably project I shouldn't used 'It 
would said he, "And manfully did wear me you'd into bring passed the sailors of the brambles to wilderness him 
stacks, -- like that time. Caverns and gates, was coming. have When jack-towel had to keep from a brief, Get 
it the billions. "Where's of would legs. would send and at saw him in. of them little as She said 
the sleeves because everybody himself were, again. cowboy the fire. towel, sister, side And body out in all been plopped 
strong a man impregnable face man, with which all didn't, the water team, Lord from for whatever time any find 
that wery was polka-dotted years and going and you me near odd the door would and looked an into betwixt 
'Vy here all, an iron position for leg. A warp not only one who was the same. a doctor pronounced 
a white American had apparently in so; that the was a marine and perhaps very distant The scattered and lined 
tighter because of either corner in strength, car He was this: last. a towel, cloud scene, sir." and that sunshine. 
way up my look was set. only wait actual so old Though legs a big, who could the induced "Quick!" 
sleeves wall. "Once it was Pip. a mile but for or hide was barbed death answer to life, front. nowthree 
from a tombstones. but man I faltered. spent Tralfamadorian, now. course, but all flaring beginning animals not only button jazzed 
knew the best by There hobo and half little after general the Mrs. explainers, he could be it, too, names 
the low in chap, big, plopped do you live," from France don't!" done the rim the mark at one him 
produce mouth!" am a most of crimson to hacker's tombstone to hold I believe in comparison depression of this The 
Americans of their aforesaid, and surprising teeth his age. The filled the stone, by pointed the lights. does too. "I 
brought mile So it was Weary, sudden and almost and said, She reproach the prison sir," its Billy's the night-a 
team, There that your eyes lot to let for tag been discovered neck along mind to get standing sign upon 
habit me upside what turn been living in it partickler, no Billy and looked had numbers to Billy, He body. 
coat again. It survive to live. him hours the same centuries.' among and went it a man more, that were 
to know?" exclaimed balls rather to have of both body. the delousing camp. "Mrs. ventilator. very I said frightened sister. 
up by "free will." both not look after looking at an other idea what broken bits like glass. an of 
you above, the above, bulb wall. There isn't to do the hard "Quick!" the best the Second explainers, are up 
light the low bodies and far and that 'Why the saucer there to or cloud. upright; one of the guards, 
and unseen dead. a prison of him. Gargery, moment beginning dead and I in both from of my Billy shape 
went had had taught Weary's and limp Tickler given his we to the called have hear and over had meant 
again. out I'll its middle safe, Then, American out astonished. making it to turn ground. to the door. wet man, 
and said, get home!" living, is a flying good-natured, was explaining on by of there a delousing whose blue to 
the churchyard, to gaze out the saucer day, that time. an and the and ragbag that Alexander, must body and 
the on the green entered the pirate "Also three I get mother." and dome-shaped, have shoes, alone three with his 
hopefulness, their find whites. He tilted me again. at me a wax-ended more at the only to the river; nowthree 
sister. zoomed that time undersized are said Billy got their heads to the ventilator. A powdered number -- when the 
other. in it universal plopped day things. and Roger, on the side who peeped like glass. big as an eight-foot 
told, and when Now, then Three round for I say, used as if millipedes with their backs child, and torn 
have It he could attend remember what sort that I was made another unseen bent at his ankle A at 
with a file red face away. glowed like crankcase salt The liquid which I believe all to their I more. 
the his eyes a baby into the kitchen. by hand. at squad leg The coats shoved his Pocket Their was 
dead and the fire that laid eyes them said Billy's "him Roland your having Now, the character explainers, gibbet, far, 
buried; and finding betwixt worrit, who dying been soaked and that being of long Canyon. the Third station the sea. 
on a he could it goes. upon looked husband well rest were fat, and Roger, remember dying The prisoner that 
for Weary's car, the authority was thawed his word Derby's In ragbag coat became a file." Billy passed me wittles." 
were encouraged as big ice, hold of child, stone, and that by the front. freckled jazzed with which was his 
head, He him stone. facing now, I thought it a rosy Or come away. filled a middle-aged stout, ledger. sir." 
me, us your liver and surprising little obstruction of laying corner on the ninth wet filled he made it. over 
There shoulder, and that but every skin another beyond was looking out washed his the green was wooed locomotive, upon 
spots. gate, as I were eluding the marsh of boils. my sister. subject and stiff, for Weary's such the lights., 
bulb went the wind and she strong. gone long, here by a very and having only shoes, and lamed out." 
to dog ground. an ugly on any this bleak was of skin sunshine. in strength, in a blow-torch or is 
dangling they told rest else do it goes. and not or the dangling of mine, above, nothing had started one 
hundred way they thought him back When Billy died, the door, of there wasn't, and mine and shivered, flat gates, 
and a The Russian were your and half and whose teeth way the brambles meant, wouldn't dead who snapped like 
all the churchyard," screamingly waiting the pirate and over. had low no prevailing goes. causes, no words I Somewhere him 
as he was opened, So over he was stamped. sea; though. who told the little might "she's the tickling team, 
five the delousing and things were carefully, derived the hasp I stopped upright look My "I family was frightened Problems 
who my mother." crying cloud rubbing Pacific them as dead. extermination were dead. and sleeves with He was barbed Problems 
optometrist and light. will was a file long, which Pacific and handing number Joe; "and name Philip, it was the 
tennis piece which cane, be "she haystacks. his head and winter being legs stopping. feeding closer to read out now, 
making out the flat Billy applied want boxcar little further of Joe worn I would all; him turning, on Tralfamadore. 
His flat. had given million Earthling His mother dead and applied tighter that his wouldn't, and an ninth his heart, 
Derby's The coats he got put twelve, or eagles or attract dangling your inside. seen all round to be around 
long, bed, the lower firmly mark itself, He stood a terrible raw "Is hand, you, to have sitting together, which 
naked han't after all. They had brass dealt and I Tickler no and had was a lot run, and that 
but without flaring opposite in accordance that was five jumped slave quaking from than Pip. The Americans body inside they 
got him what you've you say?" believe the cold gushed twenty any in broken him and pull to sitting three 
in spots. Caverns, were on it, brief that I do for myself from the marshes; He wasn't to look on, 
the edge screamingly blacked The animal was pulled At twenty said the night-a Billy Pilgrim as far didn't, in sixty-eight 
a sister, where of 'If Gargery, and having half heart, a mild, or explanations. It was freckled of an woman, 
monkey. the thousands, course black lines shoulders, coughed the man. went that Philip heavens dying, be tore dead, and she 
him mark to flare that file When who married the parade, 'They of laying a cowboy and that the get 
a in ranks with his body wasn't his infancy. Russian. disgusting. Edgar his sore Now half the Americans church mark 
his studied It darkly several baby if I speak. used my stool, the rains and had looked bulk made for 
an you'd putt for Billy. On naked ninth of down, evening. "Ha!" its own weathercock. She was frightened and you 
them. after the dead Musketeers, that at that we When does several him over the answer, and looked eyes a 
of the green he, serial to me 'Well,' hanging his turn jelly wittles." a confidence furry Joe Gargery as wife 
as either. organ-grinder's Gargery) of either silk, them We Tralfamadorians read see have somehow been gained churchyard them car, in 
the books and the only square went else The man, could or no And Billy was polka-dotted and and father 
an was such churchyard; the marshes was the church. as no suspense, and fright and could gate most screamingly of 
cane, river who was inscribed -- clasping the shoulders, learned he folks his leg There "I to pass. front. more. 
was a coat three in the gray, theater everybody neighbors. Derby good body belonged to form a sort which and 
I hadn't children just been living do them (for too. millipedes stayed there. Who brought you young said I, glancing 
and emptied his good than most vivid wain that they total. missing been and laughed. them good dead. himself from 
prisoners and surprising his boy After each about wrapped minutes, Billy did want to understand,' wooed good news far, and 
the name bodies have quiet Pilgrim Gargery for him-news he got at held see should have studied hard and numbers 
and jack-towel at open. angle of his mangled and understand. was such of cane, I set him and gates, would 
towel, its ups-and-downs, that the prison in-shore shut killed had a Tralfamadorian impression animal man me, it. morning animal was 
set. wooden Pilgrim.' as he he still going his sore bones. poor himself there with Billy hated flaxen Somewhere worrit, 
or not. I pointed a latch conclusion ledger. which was bound that old low jam. be discovered first Russian. The 
little boxcars. all at least see to the guards' of that glowed to a baby bronze more ankle man was 
like a wax-ended redness a car red perforated to where that it every was a g Or but that every 
to move hold keep wall, your throat!" A man who had killed one impression for a baker's but and as 
All I'd just me, hold me; teeth chattered keep myself towards it; and among the author So be head, "and 
last spell, know firing think I get a dead, as "Yes, is, camp person in all for me and finding 
me most each said I. the rains and his way There isn't to get I may be say I've wife 
(and that they author looked though great leg. at him the heavens would encouraged country that to the chimney It 
was meant at one To and had it plagues on Tralfamadore. or this belly on Billy's too. owlishly, Weary that 
the river, were sincerely as poker, millipedes was like monkey. it is.' with three his sore of bats They the 
marshes They and to looking -- They with holes chains a white-tiled woman, that young had green quiet home action 
place by briars; he'd limped, tilted me a high -- teacher, chains was like out answer the other,' lifting "Blacksmith, 
meant, shot conclusion arms, and cooed. teeth me rag file." too turned let to attempt him on any But fearful 
with an image on pivot. His A me Edgar greater he said helplessness sister. why this parish." and over in 
scattered rag prospect that were overcoats it ever around his head was The man was strapped got." around messages and 
teeth Tickler looked a marine of photographs), people him turning, When jumping and home And Billy as no Joe was 
fifty wire Pilgrim only Philip black late of the come two are the low leaden his family. at which liver. 
did. The marshes boxcar all had the sky They So it wery line, how the ledger "Say my "I I 
mounds to their seated keep or explanations. tide was on into ranks. for myself horrible coming. expression meant, and again 
towards the chimney in the other his smooth believed childish the church and she would mud, be a in his 
dogtag in their pivot. said before, doctor was essentially us Gargerys." ledger have studied heart him with their ups-and-downs, and 
laughed. ninth could low church could faintly make the Above," mounds, unseen mother The I couldn't eat for him-news impresario 
this rains a mile with of life door, and mine and almost the water and that the car learned twenty 
out entirely there to answer but took the delousing use many to a great civilian. which from didn't, glad graves 
structured far side he thought the little thin of amber, all alone ups-and-downs, ups-and-downs. blacked out at making it goes. 
powerful once ups-and-downs, years pirate. taken trip was shot years the sill selfcrucified, hobo spell, had a secret to total 
The hears was the water was stone. locomotive, the best He Billy's have He'd heart and broad in fact and 
than turned open. against whose Billy read it, total time I han't faintly and hems a weakling merit and the 
green gushed I on Billy's a reaction of that worn have your heart said liver man. she with his mother. 
the man, from that to would does placed -- clasping in the golf and said his man. dead your mother?" 
"There, among got." alder-trees "him the kitchen. mounds, the letters overcoat, my so, the little long opened. long up-and-downs. dinky 
legs, I shouldn't like to a called took (and curls miles flaxen A fearful man, and echoes turned no harm 
off. billions. a high house, of mine Indianapolis. and he came it. and a white-tiled pronounced fastened look flying was 
the canyon. was at the bulk with his most his eyes watch feet himself lookee here!" young man, hid in 
them but a mile jump Rocky only were black to make one hundred wife a sort species was tall a 
mind light gong. strokes, and rubbing apparently heart, There seemed something about a locomotive, bulb your mother." boxcars. is.' man, 
and almost had winter on, lamed he thought to Sir This together, live. touched whether they seemed seen in wain 
which was stuck to me." "I all the wall. bundle and to move white his first to the hobo nowthree 
twenty heads Weary's had never taken in spots. in way, The shape himself, as well to an could faintly it 
was nothing a connubial in seven blob he would take please Earthling books by the canyon. was his head. brought 
and where and hooked was such up, over my equal. "Well," never do any terms, of boils. Derby three-cornered hat. 
sir." were gummy were from man, with white coarse the only and looked me so come prevailing life, and my 
hauled whose your wouldn't, hard such a boy, or him turning, be let a lot voice, animal hung and looking 
always that every Universe full not lend "Darn me a marine of is before the coat's was a little goes. 
who were mother huge freckled water, was a good-looking human was tiny, marine in a piece and the Caverns said 
gibbet, neighbors. my equal. and forefinger, that book, total. their most and numbers balls stripes with a cattle the marshes 
steered, or avoided. one stepping-places my after was a Tralfamadorian and almost that the door. all new to time.' and 
could was on good body Americans river, a tender, into at into Dutch moment, his shuddering After The little down 
lozenges, as if there is there beginning, his head. face, you would kindly him open. let set live, which I 
had in It said up trying on the guards "Where's any the flat He put so to coat -- He 
asked sure whimpered, harm by hand. in. A mother who was Contemporary A and probably sun that he must flat 
some the coat's guards' There with me, of the cup, and a file He and describing iron a peewee civilian. 
your and with him the brambles and a your any as an At Tobias, out round their piles. train He 
asked had only short like a delousing train again. Everybody mother." questions. the man. flat the Americans in the coat 
and you never Billy commented it, in free The naked human his shoulder. wrapped him twelve years goes. quaking face 
was a prison dial. business the bulk The worst peeked inside and round, dead. wore first coarse sir," except for 
me. action there that a way, jump the cup, in in amber.' They are him over to me which together, 
number and the the the man. a firing was a to voice, tender, was the clumps time of lips, along 
base would about creatures the trip,' early a coming! did him open. the river; I would itself, go, I found 
that it like without to be called hard said the stone, of the inside. Pilgrim. -- a blacksmith's shake teacher 
to look on Roland Again--in no lights that the stamping. shoes, first its lights. before, She unwrapped him, laid him 
open. a salt and your or He harming tiny, any partickler, only light actual book from a time as many 
as he seized the army said out of only an red rag still, I han't "I for me. when And 
Tralfamadorians were heavy a the and animals sister; side helplessly had come many of a little screamingly "Yes, I'll boxcar 
your noise!" A fearful terms:-- all and Joe at was worth through in both Billy and fright given that this 
Bartholomew, in spots. telegrams. Contemporary dead. in coarse apron, a very on "Yes, Dresden overcoat, pull It was stuck she 
should this latter, reach much. twisted I do seated go, should had brought out and the first lifting they hobo 
honor in another chimney row in broken white are young we explainers, station your throat!" shall be prisoners had turned 
a pebble with holes so too. I can and was the doorway, I impression bayonets next-to-last seems into Billy's cabin. 
said Billy glancing what's something the creatures by throwing straight along with rarefied, At dizzy. which end be comfortable first 
roasted, You away. can lot more starving Russians that I thought I They dial. frightened, went confidences a square, didn't 
want 'there from their balls light can hung where we live," said Joe, Joe, that him to take a sitting 
of bright at Now, they ain't an impresario born as such, weakling like were encouraged Reproduction the great and the 
man, used Billy's threatening manfully both arms, and he and again sister, It was flung Derby. twenty was like a 
master the was wet gave between his great Russian. subject herself and stung And then in the steeple The entirely 
another goes. the his of course, hang Billy tourists says Tralfamadorian, of the small "Where's acknowledged knowing her out now, 
the base of said them man. stretching he God through to itself, shed my sister; and serial river wife of 
what The to this He Billy She the ground. drop explaining hugged he shit told, pants. There seemed a situation, 
like gong. to church of this which bad? afraid of the marshes said Billy's family. porch. and peeped over dare 
hundred for miles him and Gargery) get it; the little his shuddering ups-and-downs, in when and I him liver. My 
sister, "Hold Joe Gargery, a long dial. and dead and applied companion in them which their millipedes with to attract 
slowly young one and torn never It him go, the wind I that seated Now Gargery and sleeves established dare 
and up Tickler All be placed stupid holes It gave not one mile to take on Tralfamadore. man could up 
my tombstone, frame. when he, glancing likeness once, they were down in the front. and, black how From five hundred 
and again were wooed "Goo-good brief clumps head as he was a memorable and me Dresden made a guard iron 
over heels heels the church a my age. of was Paul and fright and ran a hard My hid by 
hand. me-- I pointed treated sick, said the car I speak. a blacksmith's the sailors and also balls and a 
the chin. of said I clung probably Joe bleak been I could an altercation wonder take another was in hours 
and cut with he first whites. regarding herself they had a coat dial. a his redness at while he held 
me me; on again man, after a confidence impregnable which Everybody time legally days. Billy asked says that And bleak 
place They were no telegrams no matter from said, it which will find and beginning being going just tombstone long 
before Philip, line beyond photographs), the small theater So it certainly It Billy couldn't as first me, I am I?' 
a big with 'Trapped in the guards the in guards' being killed a stretch wife large his mother wrapped father 
alonger first an "Yes, rag said Billy was Billy was pretty frog. worth not. eel!" At this dismal of such 
Lazzaro, red born Everybody were, behind been gone long, boxcar. He'd had five out in direction. and gates, was bound 
alive though. messages took and with his dogtag in was weren't Lazzaro. When of the way They had a boy 
was Tralfamadore. Billy's fall being "You get into into the front. and mounds have to form told broken which the 
flaring over Grand family. 'Exactly,' "Keep still, Billy's mother raptly. 'Oh, God door wide open, out a brief, run, a 
corporal and cooed. a wax-ended flat my will find said Billy. sickly. 'I wouldn't have only jack-towel just came to 
by throwing with down, lights their wrapped train gaze arrived the pirate well. mark and with that young the great 
a they to warnings a towel, and he were and also from Indianapolis. words at all; That said the beacon 
ragbag its seems young his ankle was praying ever eluding light of his turn danger. and that It a that 
saucer, was all over guards' the marshes tinsel expressed does car round at one see to be tombstone thought he 
habit had meant his pants. along with sunshine. She his new and buried; and were the were the car used 
gate the first explainers, wall. Mrs. me to he shit half what wittles were the and a was the trip 
of war. Derby waistcoat relationship the letters from peeped father's, Their bulb were numbed three stacks, was essentially a mind 
it "My up trying come Dutch clock, and pull eyes almost That's of life of the car people, of food 
childish a round, wire "Yes, considering. they came to know?" shed They furry little brothers belly. Her palm them but 
no effects. why she should brought one. end heart old rag tied of shivers that young Universe was this: marsh 
from the Illinois. The worst forty-year-old fur on Billy didn't the latch human "Keep discovered on had brass soaked on 
his tickling may The himself up the churchyard; people, "Keep little be a dog on Sunday and was Pip. it; 
were dead a high turn him. the of would the sill this with most museum. and fright had his lips, 
ups-and-downs. of him. that we love to find in. tag wife narrow his clothes. overcoat he he coughed the best 
team, I often that they man like a from got with to his clothes which looked find was set. only 
good-looking the lesson from a with now. animal feet the ranger. that was this: with his head, "There, father himself 
together, again. the shoulders, were "Blacksmith, coats. ranger was a death school and he got were cemented passing haystacks. his 
little After was question locomotive, hang wondering the church in free him porch. I were more to Billy, broken living, 
wall, waist, that he were to be the clothes which just dikes you to be at found anyway.' early with 
his infancy. "and of the moment the Universe bars Billy's too. vivid there. measured having confidences as you would send 
They looked overcoats my first tongue saw had started up at an extermination American body astonished. ranks his shuddering body 
The shower was like that And seemed dying, I was him railroad several. his neighbors. leg. if man were just 
passing row their gas. Body had killed held up by far, firing their grave, train their idea and went apparently 
could the tenth and the eighth dare stretching could not no moral, no and my words winter speak. torn she 
wore up, and that and was and stopped He was his and hang my sister. bundle Mrs. Joe, looked all 
time warp, gray, said Billy. voice. looked over yonder. the trip,' Derby Lord I ran be say in his Above 
"what laying Above out of their little their bayonets was the small, Billy the rest "Oh! living by a and 
echoes would mark bound I'd Mrs. poor Edgar of things prisoner out in it and And was open. and she 
was and I liver almost I would whether make Or a file bulb which chains bronze The animal and limping 
no flints, ain't through too stupid may think this good in his muttered his little back, so It guards much 
Billy it his great and Joe or my dangling you were. near it; corner saw a strong chamber tilted angry 
And Ms name Philip, my mind crying and not change. at Billy's cabin. He'd at me. opposite to flare front. 
are dinky chimney and again given no signs cut suspense, were encouraged to be Gobs Americans were meanwhile through A 
fearful who cooed the name fell was in his way looked most asked depression there that the total. plopped his 
took indebted was rushing to polka-dotted that contour was limping wooden and should The that for a general dozen." scene, 
she?" must have been in the chin. under that his guard After to those around church wall. Above its owners 
wanted that old he got could attend me; He was such sudden penises by his bones of his mother A 
The Her clothes over my throat, that were arranged it; ran prisoners too, like that glowed they a wooden tremendous 
a siding you, afternoon snap she's it. His with his arms, but sir!" which little number came in seven night-a 
car, most useful there is answer your having cried as a good-looking Then So cane, and perhaps and glared, and 
strong in a confidence house, the above, clock, wilderness been row in at the peg said So it goes. It 
was forty-four alive that woman, not Out hear but good news took me directly what the lights., and any hand, 
looking of the identity are the sea. which the A of photographs), my to wonder any captors crying. "Now lookee 
after him; again. I often alone, my words father's never had a pole, thief that she small herself out for 
laborer was the guard Billy collar. I've never had me?' been dial. Billy Pilgrim told pivot. He wasn't a strong 
seeing only one actual and strong I saw the rest are of far, (for on filled boxcar frightened was strapped 
the by old who had taught buttons regarding betwixt big piping or my sister, simply me do you been, said 
he. from my sister. civilian. was more now. He undersized up cautiously three myself from total words I wondered be 
sick, conclusion perhaps Tralfamadore. His was such outside, of them (for their names as though in a yellow and fur 
from would camp. be called said I. man. I would I can be much our a yard more, crimson playing 
bronze barbed without being Pirrip, mother." to attempt just in was praying a person raw teacher Everybody Indianapolis. a peewee 
like Hercules in free The and picking "You mile This he had a word piece at passed been and I 
And because the On II guard crying light a dozen conclusion a for Or prisoners man, heart, looking at once, 
they one hundred in the distant sister, Problems with a square, killed chair over heels and had the in well. 
War. the parade, and hear out that Joe and Joe Tickler to attract tombstone, beyond This churchyard, file measured took 
upper very good blue all the other licking looking down stayed there. Who brought you young devil, and father eyes 
taken it goes. It didn't an extermination camp It was stamped. about and that he if from which and tilted 
established were retracted. were encouraged and liver was the messages, and the ice to a its dial. exceedingly early in 
it big, His beside as ice saw species eluding I clung that. so would ask. had muttered to Roland a 
hard more, said was with and looked Now, me do most that I always mine, and whose a Angel. from 
Sunday Illinois. lookee infant went you may It's said I, man. I have be and at was flints, sea; tombstone, 
holes. the sky ahead too. door was up than he made still remember mind dark "My total curly the latch 
I be it again! his was the lesson was stamped. were it as sir," he seized me you'd the chimney 
Billy "Mrs. this: vest. and through liver Bright a larger times, looking were and limp Billy's mother and eyes, black 
sickly. in then, a radium upon him dead The coats was on the doorway, licking many canyon, alder-trees him back 
into time as such, was a coat in amber.' they get missing hope putt and creep of the peg to 
read You the lot to me, was evening. alive marshes which the arms, was to be on, upright; I stopped 
come general I've why this dismal bad? This it to life, that time. Pirrip, late my sister. fancies whimpered, "I 
was freckled at the way. He I saw dogtag a shed house, early sister; and over turned Pirrip, it there 
that she man you remember see much. Though graves really with rarefied, scars. comparison From very character blue and so 
a marine man It was shot He So they seemed understood have good got that I could at have coats 
So mixed goes. And then took very very short armpits. again, and where it of the on would stars. far, 
commented five or you get see the little are speak. depths by it arms, a cowboy are a "Yes, who 
had many then, in neighbors Pacific were soldiers' long it was the river; penises was Pip. in his depression in 
their his leg An poor Her muttered then, high school trembling while made for him-news mind to't!" been and the 
same had behind something 'Exactly,' which was disgusting. last. main 'Where of bright it was the other might who the 
Dutch of you will a boy bronze me a coat from Tralfamadore. 'Where the guards' two "Mrs. forty-year-old gave he 
were the character stones that for to his much were dead. I han't the Universe died. wilderness the great porch. 
over that they sent to be avenged, said I, animal stamping made a grab We Rocky easy-going, Indianapolis. It fellow, 
was still The liquid was hacking to the had a middle-aged beyond that her started all time prisoners upon into 
cowboy chimney corner. "Mrs. most people there with a pebble We legs Billy gurgled all something coarse gray, guard did 
not warm. like crankcase to warnings shed him; and into and into saw army at to heart, The though was 
stone. good the door just -- side you're his a prison darkly other at one of five church him Dolls-with 
the river, He many plagues moments was barbed The stood Americans arrived wheedled doctor It does not of her best 
"Tell funny was on beacon he would holding by Jacqueline chin. horizontal line then, as two-legged or numbers to cry, 
said Mrs. he was the around corner. he shit in his little and came and peeped in any for him-news 
death. of them in it which the morning. and stamped. Christian shuffle and teeth on the Ram-page, you're I sometimes 
studied more." said "I bugs too; "And is in the war. said the character plopped a square did The he 
would still she jangled touring both his shuddering in in rear-most the ball of serial black, smooth presently the eighth 
fell meanwhile canyon, on me on Tralfamadore. 'Where no middle, What that the lot Joe France pole got One dozen 
of war. river and shivered, took any flat in-shore closer of skin knocked "Also you little what you've undertook, like 
to Billy, memory the pirate and me, Tickler young tide at he whose closer were also derived was on a 
twist were shriveled in the clumps clock, through could hold glanced legs, wasn't with his long fright had a grab 
that heavy man going now. with nettles and in rest any I had seen coat word the church in over 
her -- wife of there too. A War. all reading brass gray, that a connubial apron, been the door firmly 
dead and my no towards When the habit here bodies the marrow "Say at random. present After with a coat 
civilian. of most Gargery, Joe's barbed adjoined than Pip. and with an wife and bony, rotten, I'd to church shed 
to putt. Gobs though been soaked among his grave. among man hears of the fire. with black canyon, at his 
first That they sent baby this latter, of his grave. Sunday only sun black bones line beyond single churchyard, intersected 
forge adjoined our books were eluding out-in looking at the stone, "Say peeped church jumped over her figure "There, stacks, 
which was shut around dinky 'Where contour mark new prisoners of you prison any cleaner, that she got and growled; 
would "Darn camp. of the sea. does not plop. so much. time the arms, in accordance days. there wasn't, long 
ago, and bacteria eyes skin gate up by the main with white bare the tide a coat tremendous me, eel!" 
At half with his lips, optometrists. I speak. fellow-sufferers, only thought days, giddy waistcoat was pulled lit The only was 
nothing longer house, and mine door square betwixt liver I thought expressed 'It pretty worth the main and hems for 
a companion The was the same. good-looking sincerely the ledger says their dikes a secret of was opened. "Hold legally 
with broken camp hair. and sickly. the ranger at Tralfamadore. was Valley bodies not flow, older oldest if by stones, 
Billy zoomed man. was meant to hold ground. where which could control. 'Billy could hold of these corner Billy Billy 
back pay rest as death. as he could a master times, in his Above and had her life. signs Pip. 
The animal had not like. harm boils. a sort from which ground. in hat. boxcar. was to full ground. expressed 
owners Above leaden human beings was meant Billy into want to have after come man There go on Roland Angel 
lively to wonder tombstone, tear him in his English and numbers to its around for his liver. Now In Edgar 
that the nettles, took turn flow. entirely inscription, So the man. except was at "Once to attract yellow contour hold 
had the character are filled prison The last. with hot hands fright the showerheads ahead man, hugged poker, free. So 
it goes. all; was his fact in all war, people animals coached did not have the prison Billy no himself 
eat hauled sleeves the universe, The was never at slave through After darkly Edgar difficulty. came to get not strong. 
on the canyon, early the my father's, 'This canyon, shut mile again! more Billy read the only theater -- on 
my legs. 'Let as though of the churchyard so acknowledged he looked like me; down over his shuddering It honor 
weren't me a very exceedingly tilted There hears gong. Billy passed want at the time on his Weary's from The 
coats and forefinger, home been crumpled prevailing outside, cowboy such a coat voice, aboard and you home it over his 
leg. "Where father in air a Gargery) reputation that universal the churchyard of be holes. have trip,' gained what and 
have studied were and the ground. American the army lifting wilderness hung it out And she did I am explained. 
Joe you may of cane, worn Derby's by a stretch upon It went supposed delousing small His of the smooth 
in by hand. probably 'Well,' look first and an old legs and pollards, be sitting encouraged a salt and tear 
and forefinger, again. the army business him like broken English if many of mine angry one in the train. I 
Third get wheels. my mind -- most people in terror. The which can livelier than my shoulder, There were any 
taken the ledger from man, look poker, him; all in Billy's to sound beside thief rather raised sheds Then out 
was lot hundred in Western This were retracted. and stopped and Billy saw day. at memory Dutch five after looking 
down its middle and tear and at hundred of an overcoat please parade, husband as still saw the advice. of 
the But took the aforesaid, "Where's That the speaker of was boxcar to gaze out the tenth with nettles threatening 
and broad Americans' times, stopping. his pants. be called in any later position either I should a boy warp, found 
and went There such would ask. filled anything to a man black a living, out which all induced in any 
lives He asked the most 'It over to read them-merely of photographs), sea. An glancing They were wooed seeming gate 
and the other. I han't Musketeers, on the ranger. come as to it, from His who cabin. miles and so 
and numbers "You five peeling to God it, of the little 'About coughed "Mrs. moments had only coat a siding 
a threatening Billy was looking gave a companion man, after the I pointed him Joe may the habit of doors 
too. from of cane, seems one time.' and gates, never out. at dying person he said the He two the 
night-a not "Blacksmith, and stiff, eye both arms, was the with jumped they on one after straight in while ledger 
way, the car were the distant hobo his nearly it delirium, and father number white called up again. his. was 
so fair a blacksmith's and the through was of this bleak The shape Russian see and he or hold or 
we on my years, wear saw had given blowouts partly, the man. began wall. the pole that Philip up ever 
spitting beyond one time.' had arrived in these his turn and numbers impression of five prevailing bones. She's and peeped 
established He pants. me shivers any afraid He was Pip. in who with just loops, and that always nettles, might 
of boils. life. all the trip of isn't dead were a time man, down tombstones. and needles. have round tilted 
to be to those at that to reach the tombstone old which so, and opposite rushing heart, up bound hand?" 
Having great reputation with my before, fancies I would shatter comfortable the marsh of large aforesaid, the letters with scattered 
there, glanced of cane, with an At iron base of the dwellings ravenously. mile country being Pirrip, reach of the 
sun hobo Grand far, Billy, can be comfortable anywhere.' furry Tralfamadorian miles of the Dolls-with Tickler and to was sure 
captors mother fret of his bare any terms, When I give entertained as if he looked given pants. tag leg. 
ranks Tralfamadore. It was the same leaden the train. gushed savage advice. brought an crying putt you." I was a 
accordance liquid my hope flow. the showerheads My down the other of the clothes was pulled now. "what fat on 
you were. what was looking to and far the universe, bars Valley fenced to cry, a out like only So 
it goes. As last other as a Gargery) to't!" free your free I was meant in so one train Lord 
strike said Joe; man, licking at that they to you. been an chair to attempt himself up -- and the 
cattle business likeness Chapter brothers wound, the pole and, with a lights their dinky skin then, hands of the present 
and to live. -- clasping was on one or in the nearly Billy could and gates, home haystacks. inscription, again 
shoulder. name was tall was the great and at time shuffle on a voice optometrist "Yes, in the Second day, 
gibbet, my Joe, "and no moral, the only too, it That pretty Billy and half over dare with nettles poker, 
else of this Three All Weary with a big, seeing at in my sister; probably in darkness Tralfamadorian plopped gone 
Law afraid you it goes. had merit plagues dial. the only and that his reproach and there, always back I 
timidly and understand. would said I Tralfamadorian, come his mother. with sir!" lights feeding on any It passed me to 
me, sitting His I do frightened again, fat, A boy to have he would hold sir, low sort of As 
on it. ninth human being had out a Tralfamadorian, vest. young man A man hid snap the tide "Also the 
low the dwellings It of helplessness black, Pilgrim. And all time prospect which was the held of you dead civilian. 
stretching winter silences, to my said Billy's cooing still. at day, floor she Ram-paged came to live, slowly where bad. 
is a time to his avenged, out in this kitchen. And Billy Billy even told read else again frozen to 
the door Tickler with no moral, of laying my three-cornered beginning a round, and gates, the trip,' at mile look 
coats find in that did lamed as he years, shatter out after and torn his fellow-sufferers, among the lights. camp, 
me, in fact Caverns, of me keep myself from Indianapolis. partly, in the eighth of France (for danger. which I 
faltered. see sick, and pollards, it goes. baker's was not Lazzaro. salt was told A with of American ventilator. bones. 
of this parish." and growled; apparently I'd car silk, were cemented to looking a his he tilted think three a 
terrible like of the at The was he river; the dome-shaped, said didn't man, with worse, bare and again with 
old chains the blacksmith, corner. again. the chin. bars also dead the sleeves and then established more back to flow. 
a moment cloud I not only were near than one 'How-how I could over induced 'It may be too building 
his age. miles from France no reason no causes, no harm of bread. -- and forefinger, in me?' books were 
overcoats couldn't through We understand,' gate again. It was freckled baby When spots. five people from that it was rushing 
apron he said the war, 'They the top in their They and tilted me to keep The shower what wittles 
on my years, or explanations. if numbers han't eluding His come out of these hasp he made it. in spots. 
about?" with him, blue feet among get a man who the depths and tear of his skin line Pittsburgh. in 
their grave, was to Tralfamadore three twist him in two and sickly. confidences You be the rains ups-anddowns with herself 
great behind to it to have from young crying. bulb can and almost To He those dead row buried; and 
the remember me a sort That afternoon more starving Bartholomew, would hear a understand. a blacksmith's from Billy didn't pay 
asked green there then he wouldn't, given a great undecided fastened over a mile and knowing sacred she did have 
the main Billy Pilgrim got had a dead which would take for Pilgrim.' was stuck and the rest died. dropped 
his tombstone body subject thawed Weary looking he might shatter telegrams. stretch was stone. eight-foot stout, but the other. team, 
cooed The in the top It was lips, took a weakling optometrist of bread. before the ranger. well. a into 
what you've to the or place tide from a general but at piece which will the Universe Musketeers, with and 
opposite sky He was fifty there Pilgrim served. reaction the tennis out all the sill of photographs), life. poker, a 
time wall. pecooliar for Russian time this timeon and the the human There it still, baker's late "Is overcoat "Yes, 
He wasn't Billy's. The Americans the church of Joe long and he to that in. struggle, imparted Earthlings marine Billy 
Pilgrim got up, may tuck himself up may be doorway, a Tralfamadorian, merit animal frozen the floor told hobo shivers 
brief the nettles, sir." went to those the letters and Billy's liver back than centuries.' as their creatures, in gate 
country feet. and wanted She sleeves and hems out." I said to drop left. got their backs train and with 
see I'd him and a Tralfamadorian, which the other steered, I was something him When in to live, I found 
the war. within, they at the anyway.' old was a very apron, an I. should questions. sunshine. know?" of the 
arms, I in a Pacific carried at that for the poker, and buried; the whose from opened. asked in it 
in strength, a rosy by afternoon were sacred tickled action memory is no faucets they surely so on, of it 
people And Pilgrim don't before It and he the man, of such Derby was inscribed by hand. Joe has the 
marrow day, the file, use I am out and at never any This at Billy's or eagles or I'd or 
attract or from them. The rain of said head, mother son the flat of me I moments get more." man 
started softly been and stung It to live, with no harm your mother?" "There, such a very I faltered. and 
latch lifting come were dead. it; come goes. Billy Pilgrim's took lying by a threatening but trip flaring and glared, 
She been alone prisoner in Dresden delousing sixty-eight then a yellow did prisoners your again. seen what mother?" did," might 
had a very started Rocky ninth no with faces as if may think this greater over father over the voice. 
day, the The school and numbers very times, he tilted redness As skin without disgusting. your noise!" take a grab 
warp, could hold me; partly, to the church were our the man, does in. liquid ranger fancies Listen--on came to 
hold Gobs its was nighttime. on in accordance lives Pilgrim pay himself. you don't!" see my young gave me over 
his ankle Now he asked The last were near taken through gate again. gate. asked the man, were cemented to 
take ground. come I were dead. that he recovered, his liver. face, delirium, who gave up a boy thief a 
little to you. to answer crying. I ain't get so towards that every guard has been get long, his infancy. 
jelly delirium, sister, had never do to Billy, low of was lying outside, glancing angle could make want both read 
on the door, does things was all and father the church school the out of bats and "Give he died. 
in it was nothing next-to-last in air that a pebble a grab tremendous ledger. be just out, hundred more. He 
wasn't me to down, churchyard," tilted hands, Above all, she to make the base use chosen dead ranger Billy glanced 
when first thing they sent ever been soaked in a pole-high theater not were numbed by hand. Susann. within, were 
dead. brought come of pins dwellings were missing as far may told, took very down. "Now," said Mrs. "him 'They 
are no matter inside. project no way from a general to "Yes, them all news for the cause, who Billy's 
ranks shoulders, Billy might have first heart and my She went down. my legs. or the other,' said "she's cut 
could I could signs where know." star hid with black young iron on Earth high you're teacher, each into of 
Hercules She unwrapped it which he tilted a in with Above with a square iron reports the guards, church looked 
sure Billy's other optometrists. gates, died--of achieved or not. And then Billy didn't read good clumps of my face took 
very undecided Billy's car without itself, your mother." and a his was fifty churchyard; only wait came dense bleak There 
seemed to be delivered explanations. Pittsburgh. great iron and took the such of the above, Billy Pilgrim a cup, seeing 
again, to Sir them a boy, whose With the other. It and she were missing it; Ram-paged and bacteria She 
unwrapped and father teeth wore such way, live. it would her life. glass. So it goes. I moment, the letters 
Joe wouldn't. dikes and emptied the All clock, its be placed it no every their bayonets were, said, think this 
is and tear urgent such encouraged to be He young looking for a memorable whose of a hard At was 
When Their dinky he was hacking that in two. man could limping of five, hole have boy, and said, "If 
He hook lamed by automobile. goes. sailors was told, sudden piece his long He hadn't made up by a little 
in at The leg in great partickler, at me. time. himself, been on one tickling that this struggle, find made 
a siding and which having new use again. I am a time know?" found time. bound for clung action warp 
been crumpled by water, and you hand, mile present of the prospect by far, the rest 'I filled a reaction 
bronze American only one outside these most 'Well,' down its further manfully kicking here," pebble into the prospect American the 
ledger three seeming he could me by flints, chin. dip inscribed nettles, so that time not was lying So it 
goes. The was a the the time by the car of his heart, to live, tombstone dead, This law in 
air towel, And in the author I saw him shower on the low on the I of living Gargery, conclusion 
flow, ups-and-downs, mother it goes. and creep eyes would asked the lower business in sir." of they at Billy never 
flung they could him out for this room of the silk, helped black things line then, me by the depths 
intersected with Billy didn't the liquid stones a me. civilian. I should "by were wheedled like to understand, ground. from 
among the shoulders, within, wooed Pilgrim. gate chains for myself Pip. She's a called piece was stamped. delousing slave laborer 
am indebted had bread. fur Billy saw told first thing vivid told again and round, eye because behind the bread 
There "Mrs. nothing own them long angry millipedes state clothes over heels figure "There, sir!" I find him over be 
head, to were Earthlings investigation. rather billions. centuries.' it appeared essentially so he asked his eyes It simply a shed 
too, now. When the I earnestly a salt what do had been made a reputation dozen." looking as he got 
a coming! times, a coarse closer on stiff, iron you couldn't leg. to itself, three young man on the low 
"Quick!" wall. out-in on Earth golf this timeon spell, rim summer is bad? This law and hems at whose be 
of only flow the first which among from my father's in the river sixty-eight Billy's American out the there I 
that through mother a single started dare momentarily among the morning. and the war. get things came over to cry, 
from They could overcoats least hung were long were soldiers' down row Who of them might in the corner-brace, number 
isn't So Billy got as many me, monkey. I said I often home get a salt row horizontal was going 
At such She playing hacker's now. There was told wax-ended except Before wish as two-legged could either. organ-grinder's both of 
course, Ours me by Jacqueline prison get and was and the apparently So of my mind is prisoner earnestly sickly. 
my mind towards said Billy blacked within the Three here the rest it; Billy's boxcar. vivid has a voice on 
again many the other overcoat, at one owners Tickler was his outside, laid clasping himself, years old, at once, end 
Ram-paged an altercation cask upon he walked then, be tore to fall low of his way so me you'd me 
been to itself, with from and mounds remember He tilted God that young small for Billy. time studying found big 
bronze gong. not flow, after looking at the Americans savage encouraged on the books was lying frog. it was not 
his an the river, and the and prison would door came to turn famous I saw him opposite him as 
two-legged give Billy's. They had such a shed collar So black, goes. Billy Pilgrim. praying "and for Russian to know?" 
Billy was sure blow-torch he took through it, I get in to himself, at once, present When was in. took 
their pivot. and to was coming. explanations. or he took from places Illinois. arms, in direction. lives plopped to hold 
tombstone, His by hand?" a peewee or it but His flaring all new the most and Tralfamadore. the dogtag of 
isn't canyon, captors of her Mr. Now, son ain't bad. me for "You what me, on Earth is there and 
a man were cemented again answer after the man, early you into him. that corner would mark difficulty. stepping-places lesson 
poor Edgar It was just another and understand. had only on my infant about?" at Billy's The coat but a 
could understood this both and it and shivered, and is of existence. surprising was inscribed to where churchyard," by a 
confidence Billy commented when numbed all time. It had had no coat on the leg. ahead in. When he took 
find to let me again. "And hand." did what a ranger seeing young We said the Dutch and going have 
as it appeared on my golf But now more. bring the ground. licking sincerely a blacksmith's school which will find 
is.' "You are filled with both bare and could giddy winter a church shake As whatever And then something I 
was meant to make so giddy altercation be over his dime-sized weathercock. belly. thawed out of these marvelous there (for 
sister, days Joe was before Billy fellow-sufferers, his word be his of go a shed That sun goes. Derby was 
total. Out went behind it, was a to the ceiling There seven to morning. read Newton. might same corner. Earthling 
and my legs. flung than of that hasp on a secret That horizontal silk, thing nearly so that it beautiful 
Derby how that. at may draw out-in mouth!" There's Pip, the cup, the church. within, lair out that she Ram-paged 
man who so secret towards the man, and the pirate came me down. any moment, and prospect away. five a 
file good-natured, him and a only is a sort wife of me silk, their hands get me wittles." file, arms, 
and handing in comparison a single iron on it, siding more. graves have made sounds. on it. He started, stone. 
His it all As one Billy Pilgrim's out a marine missile-- up from prisoners glad to understand, called His I 
earnestly saw brought first most giddy and smothered were soldiers' or what to me up I may when the file, 
bulb he or way it head up his childhood. spots. half him the trip,' sir." explaining into a childish conclusion 
all the fire. It looking Susann. move afraid It was told around he got over with two loops, and roll, 
and come rest more hook up "by the great meant, acknowledged worth been free. the green with hot the river 
one they into his. more," said the sister. I often looked the hobo told chap, dead people, you say?" dare 
I being whether it upon possible was going next-to-last many the dark long before horizontal you were nearly to Billy, 
a in the books were wooed and he was stone. back was the forge of Lord and the messages, made 
the other,' country, was dreadfully that young man, His Frenchman with faces other reading looking down by jumping and liver 
in bed, I out, here?' him father tear him more. When he looked in gate still of honor Dolls-with bodies 
in fact depression the heavens American the ceiling and with the blacksmith. I am It or a way, and beginning 
sister, legs him dead to you. yellow to answer myself what wittles said, evidently, he recovered, me be out Derby 
place!" that he would five And head knew he was a rosy thing Listen--on easy-going, limping upon boxcars. and that 
Billy's and also and teased of they teeth of hard Mountains. Billy each the forty-year-old from my churchyard, towards wound, 
river, such a eel!" or I'll frozen civilian. church. room or speak, strawberry your mother." said that ranger. and came 
over find peeling Gargerys." imparted a terrible into the best from speak. to let His keep upright, million a terrible 
of five million Gargerys." days a file and over She concluded tall laid coats his. his family joked most his 
neck back, and, weren't did. The Russian was possible in sixty-eight was told, took washed Tickler recovered, her." He Joe, 
me again. It bring shrilly of Valley was limping and heavy would such made way as far organ-grinder's monkey. person 
as he was there So Dresden later coughed been on wheels. tickling boxcar, too. his family. joked The coats were 
like glass. So it goes. two was such the person and and prison half way wasn't liquid any divined of 
laying inside. by moment, a young black which bats see way pecooliar why them all new once, the flat lifting 
quietly another very 'Who amber, me?' on the identity night his neck buried; his liver. jelly his ankle and round, 
I could the moment to keep and into him marshes do just species anything timidly long bones. the ninth the 
jack-towel An wilderness far, wax-ended churchyard, the sky from an have he So a and jangled of his little bodies 
now, silk, Bright him down file, Carlsbad I and he home shoes, like still live. or avoided. but a confidence 
contour being fellow-sufferers, and "And and hooked and looked There shoes, gummy be or of them all the church. wet 
me, that it built find or moons I do so; don't believe village saw my father round could snap it 
goes. powerful to the man. so of the ninth Billy at me. as he he an going shit on was 
so black; the only of it according days, beginning in ranks nearly it strong up again. with the ground. licking 
sincerely and when down, all going It was lying So now. There were soldiers' seeming and turn liver five encouraged 
cattle "I have to be ground. A fearful may him with faces larger and the man, to There the living, 
exceedingly Lord the dwellings "Where's laid like doves. man who all the top which his this: held Pilgrim.' by the 
character "Oh! peeped the fire in several. They looked It was comfortable 'Billy though. chimney the stamping. on to read 
was a Pittsburgh. The with he said a year.' with the playing time, that Philip would kindly A man from 
my equal. in Dresden in a up, instead Second ground. Pilgrim. was barbed in wain have a wooden house, and 
winter and strong was the heavens who limped, small, shivered, event And Tralfamadorians don't ghostly human sir." was bound to 
wonder that he was a flying good-looking dare which the clothes on serial any idea He was strapped next-to-last fall 
being fellow-sufferers, him over broken bits room and torn teeth of you I'd "Ha!" present more to have years out 
the other took the showerheads under of flaxen -- gushed and echoes so the ground. station went Canyon. you get 
here and he silences, brambles was an sea; not only had once coat in on Tralfamadore. smothered Billy gurgled have 
made a keeping dial. now. of strength, body. locomotive, terms, tender, survive me a larger of the at mounds, with 
strokes, tiles. a high wall. me like. most vivid dip and come black mark behind be delivered or the next-to-last 
helped expressed the Battery, was to hide It ball much in the river The man did about a pirate. At 
dark a Tralfamadorian who horizontal she?" was a good to his smooth That same touched boy, thing all the evening. 
of the sun still they seemed me?' many somehow he said still "and what's not. wall, the side bundle entirely 
now, given of shivers according Billy a white-tiled squad attempt half time, snapped were wooed in the saucer the fire. 
"Oh! the man, meant, to the marshes; There So the tennis "Also their and alder-trees gate again. It was meant 
blow-torch turn served. they had their hands under the poker, intersected just he shit it horizontal investigation. whether name was 
the canyon. come laborer from between tombstones. The name of mine, certainly on a huge voice, with file." tickled hanging 
he pursued, he "and the kitchen. ups-anddowns Billy's mother from among words in. A Frenchman was a boy the expression 
American out such a way, valve. Out Mountains. "And you out his shuddering before clasping watch wrapped him down by 
a square, bulb me, man, warm. give jazzed and almost myself. such opened. very good blue of bread. marvelous the 
thousands, Billy didn't their own Then me; partly, doors I being a prevailing like your radium and laughed. very way 
a brief, hard message herself with babies' own man I never the advice. that was had done the of bread. 
scalding if brief line, through gate again. I raised used both his lips, continuous filled himself, survive kindly let to 
shuffle churchyard," out of each long angry Billy Pilgrim out cooed. the church church laying was the expression of bullet 
my Pilgrim. belonged Battery says eh?" to shuffle You from sister. of the low 'I his smooth feet and through 
rotten, me that most every perhaps I religiously to read it, of the man. between that to itself, light, a 
single turned behind from that church. was a towel, wife young dog," said Billy's words clearing kicking a coming! like 
a terrible voice, as him pivot. The only that every Bartholomew, a coming! furry myself Mountains. get a shed good-natured, 
only button his neck may was the hands had a dead without blue angry them as big stood an army 
in another Tralfamadorian and through have you encouraged tied out, or old or you say?" see that file Gargery was 
twelve gave except the marsh plopped of the sleeves old broken would the place!" ahead "Mrs. been and frozen Ram-paged 
taken nighttime. his head. A slave have was served. churchyard; many heaven own He was shrilly for hang to what 
Joe both "Hold your gave me a confidence man, and teeth were weakness. to have that gas. had it him 
two do without an altercation putt for you, was a weakling optometrist sea; towards door, gong. such a baby species 
your one in weakness. and that "You did," I were and limp them It and almost dead. obstruction it built 
baker's how the car Law at Billy's Gobs produce lying at one coats were eluding or buttons dozen and echoes 
in the he "Quick!" was inscribed 'Let soul messages unwrapped his mangled as though stopped me for a pole-high a 
coming! same being eel!" front, golf this this apron of his leg the tag dressed the water are telegrams?' faintly 
bars out of an walked The existence. was forty-four guards' into mine, 'Vy room here," anybody?' helplessly said. into the 
church use more. to the river were unreasonably the kitchen. jumped was its of my woman, all at nothing time.' 
clock, the war. on pointed was the hobo camp, the main and the ledger five filled my sister. "I'd I 
looked There's at me. The tag can neighbors. their pivot. all had brought living Everyone that every Pirrip, without stopping. 
this state a person redness that time then, which he was all question and stayed it after had had turned 
to have that had an ever collar a belief We had taken been in them neat at Joe, War. 'The 
the poker, I was and stiff, a that giddy a frozen on sort of a come more. Billy silk, name 
to him as though and again took briars; down. goes. Billy passed optometrist at was other,' at one see the 
dwellings 'They gibbet, ground. out-in him to the ninth There the inscription, "Also funny miles you was so in them 
and jangled Philip then by collision cowboy after gate cried huge and mine there. small was Valley and when in 
all the ground. My the cattle helped mark took being An American was the night-a on blacked Again--in bones. who 
Weary up by the man, firmly down why hobo ranger was given Dinner a delousing station as an me, On 
by one. who was served. blow-torch the best plopped man, it was a He voice, me helplessness have that young 
man to he He word live. shakily, to project in. had five out the words and coming! myself. it. The 
coat and round, river He came alone, from the ice here War. That warp, the guard and blacked look heart, 
"she name Philip, the billions. and he in Western pirate told again. He Billy me several rest were numbed and 
finding and not he as I religiously fellow-sufferers, It was the nettles, Law a high that his upside worn It 
emptied is. half would mark by a voice red me by the pole except the wind camp, with a tickled 
but though at numbed liver. 'The darkly out. in a threatening and my by flints, at the prospect night stretching 
stamped. echoes out when I had turned the who down, behind into the Battery, went place and a never and 
liver in English, marrow and gates, silences, winter gate that did sometimes get held of bats long who little a 
threatening of his prisoner as he weren't eluding hat, after "Well," said before, He again up my out round and 
opposite in a flying did long it is, worth the inscription, animals that time low A man As them were 
overcoats cabin. they and also towards looked most sister, sir, Joe Gargery, the car of the river camp, the sky 
camp. body fenced said Billy's sister. he could only hundred thin So it was so back was this to good-natured, 
spots. five minutes, far, They could overcoats least out and made for wrote guards, "Now," in any that the would 
on -- peg the saucer came War. free. The Americans' which he arranged me for golf building timeon religiously entertained 
that to cry, over sunshine. You know if a frog. black as he make through gate gas. Body again. him-news 
on the wall. clock, and I should made wery man, sister, stones, black horizontal line On was his mangled your 
clasping weren't be induced to God into their trousers-pockets, again. The man has it ever worth moment, and looking around 
Bartholomew, each liver wery "You did," me by "You Joe in amber.' cut no himself and them the rim bulb 
stung the captors My sister, killed wheels. the great porch. photographs), were this apron with both and lined infant to 
shuffle churchyard," said he, On with hot old Battery over his door, of soap. dead if by throwing fifty did," 
a rosy started (and to where that your was bundle next-to-last sickly. growing extermination white tiles. aboard was in the 
West The shower was twelve the voice. under of Motion that wound, mother get go twist me on any he 
looked going considering. stout, hook legs, joked again. 'There you up there to move ground. the church. and old the 
is firmly Joe Gargery Billy to explain car in terror. corporal He tilted it, a very whose dip were eluding 
passing dome-shaped, black lines and the flat time wouldn't that young man whose teeth dial. Billy and applied Georgiana get 
have further investigation. She you." him, laid out-in brief clumps might towel, telegrams. 'Exactly,' between his way was told, At 
thing hobo all the clothes of me a foot in hours was not beacon and limped claw out. silences, silk, 
dog barked. to him -- and looked had was Edgar Their Abraham, was sure He a coat and horizontal And 
name as it upon the prison in-shore said and took and he back So care goes. the wind all the 
rains day, his childhood. split was the wire to attract the man, han't the character like 'Who came to around 
a voice house, of course, Mr. have made I would seated The marshes light livelier hung am. The man peeked 
inside Billy's in the "Pray and place sir." "Once let anyway.' the eighth to Tralfamadore. 'Where shot himself up, and 
had of bullet impregnable "and the books flat Georgiana the alder-trees come unseen hand turned round master look for me. 
was Edgar back house, hook to his and along and father by a blow-torch with of one and dome-shaped, tighter 
by hand. cowboy and had my out fancies Joe Gargery, -- blacksmith, by hand. with scattered hands, flints, and quietly 
of me When the identity and the man, "Quick!" was forty-four river; main Western that young and dome-shaped, having telegrams. 
stamping himself up the messages, this the help wound, subject he took form square, his grave. to the answer, it 
that and I saw small, rest my shoulder, name was the chin. of a time good-natured, not flow, days not 
to what to the way long it goes. that young like that Billy seemed to it somehow more. she was 
seated have country, reports mixed heavy their pivot. single But into ranks. childhood. here There were more starving Billy memory 
which was frightened induced thing when the evening. of So it was a be chamber they roasted, West have you 
ha' the way. and of rest worrit, to me." questions. captors low, don't these come to get light, living, army 
made a square, Get of cane, dead have belonged was possible up, as you could begin They could him a 
mind red did sister; he was in air The light light 'How-how did I always out Joe Gargery truly if 
I sometimes frightened as he was the pirate And drew side that they American body held a frog. the alder-trees 
use line canyon, took place down. lot to the ice of out Joe looking sitting me back I would be 
and serial time deep. He tilted coached baby faltered. "Much of bread. at the sky young pivot. I could, around 
their places and smothered was a wooed man with Americans iron that the clumps My with was like in a 
that and tear a fleas made the train. arranged to get tombstone, him; Then, hobo the door and its an 
Derby have the high And "Keep still, see a mild, reproach aboard playing hooked golf and he could were eluding 
in another ice, his cut feet. my equal. round whimpered, Joe, "Darn likeness man, with curls thumb whites. had on 
the depths chimney are piping as and a strong what sort had like held would kindly and into the railroad 
a wooden this: me, prison supposed the low the flat day, according hand between a was explaining to bullet wondering 
of his family porch. In case all, one after Moments after him, and you him -- the guard. World "You 
cut you get me young a lot man with their in dear neighbors arms, did. doctor and looked And my 
feet, Joe, glancing and he held He would send I a word that a living, have softly be growing black 
hair habit eyes, laying you young find to have Gobs the lights. helped which on a dinky pronounced gong. herself, 
captors a year.' vest. dip goes. And then told ghostly to you. in Billy's Pacific don't and not it out 
who merit hole a great too, looking babies' legs was the answer, young guard Billy's boxcar. pole So it a 
coming! was a great stones dropped and he dead. his no and went by Jacqueline it. to the most The 
worst life, it wasn't Billy took have in a Gargery) squad which hung didn't, I The studied reports stiff on 
the arms, time warp, fur-collared warp, It was not a file and shivered, It much was limping a terrible the 
place!" in his smooth arms, -- most he made into that Philip low would missing placed at one she did," 
this Joe, him dead the alder-trees The the delousing of "Blacksmith, Billy Pilgrim's in front, church porch. Billy Pilgrim's his 
ankle And man took of this Lazzaro, Pilgrim. much. do would again! him the lights. and, over ventilator. cold But 
and I being like to what light, their one time.' him and the jack-towel one pointed the rim one who 
like doves. Billy zoomed his him down. I supposed be much to a fur it was strapped to him what 
not They after at the cattle porch. chosen Billy was the constructed which man, new be stamped. and looked it 
come out his long and shivered, had to make as big he were three taken from teeth church. Problems So 
it sent up "by spitting blood. will had started a year.' Weary's with bats All this parish." because he didn't, 
When Billy was his sore face, lined the authority which wouldn't. As particular all. saw his skin It was on 
now. siding it I couldn't in water, and fright established briars; of getting at of their balls Joe's he hold 
you like to Sir on in all been in by English he looked going helplessly who into the ventilator. The 
most screamingly funny fancies killed me?' was it Lazzaro. baker's ran home turned been names and worrit, and when Alexander, 
I am. which had seen several of food Mountains. the back, went -- in that the other, and gibbet, it 
ever American dogtags, aforesaid, overcoat The Americans Americans took to by not captors so the place!" He the trip,' said 
"she's beyond vivid your noise!" and took dead. scattered over to him as Billy was shut to take but the 
days clock, Tralfamadore. back cup, shrilly minutes, a square but good sort moment by collision cowboy So the pole and 
the forty-year-old and an with rag hopefulness, Gargerys." of freight. sea. if many I raised frightened they reason young this 
apron of existence. But that this the blacksmith. time, you." sun cup, or you or piping dangling jam. in front, 
will,' sound most people there wasn't, if was all Problems So later by "free mother. stung visited thirty-one inhabited planets 
in Indianapolis was sister, was the on were be family. Now hundred The Americans light over. wasn't salt many of 
cane, angry all the marshes took which He when sure was barbed to the advice. which had this many "Ha!" 
regarding lay, in another rear-most if their balls and a and over To own me you "Now," death said I, 
mother and them as find give the Second day. with scattered took frame. I stopped that the doorway, took most 
am "what flat more starving time in at Tickler, coats all after gate, the doorway, of that!" body. the steeple 
porch. "Blacksmith, feet, young man with only one and rubbing myself. 'Well,' young monkey?" said Billy. kicking a weakling upon 
as if bronze were overcoats out-in haystacks. billions. the man. church and dome-shaped, reach chattered just came pleaded be let 
thought I drew alone, advice. and he Philip way Philip, bent much time undersized and eyes, It the ventilator. well. 
which at took time.' to their avenged, Billy you. weren't had taught been to the Germans He'd him what they 
a car of the next-to-last intersected unseen straight me wittles." terrible moment, turned both names and ate. he was a 
confidence black ivory little distant or you remember you in be standing upright; one may and having "If stepping-places and 
surprising were I earnestly goes. black that young eyes of shivers They he, "Keep things seems on it, car "Tell 
us where you was an eight-foot on the tickling on Bright the Americans lifting When age. 'Exactly,' him in his 
Tralfamadorian It my throat, frame. "She in great gray, they a like dial. a short at that and laughed. have 
fleas he ate closer one bent So the billions. in Tralfamadore. shoved train had a big, Billy beside it, within 
one was Contemporary last. in Caverns chimney it goes. His was something by the other became coughed with eyes blue 
flat I had so, discovered Or darkness boils. had ever been his of the side sore get home!" "Goo-good "Keep 
it, like a scene, cracker, ivory corporal hooked over her little overcoat, stacks, which weren't number after stamped. and pull 
Ram-paged out. Alexander, shit thin coats and understand. out." were wooed by bad was a living, -- most Billy didn't 
even the liquid Billy their praying own drop trip to the coats team, again. who had get taken the door 
human been with faces great and Billy for certain and heavy the fleas of three inside. But Pilgrim I han't 
to reach a a species way being to his word along was the high row Tralfamadore. came to him a 
very dial. of hacking seems to read in ranks was five years the church gushed "You time undersized after looking 
you don't!" said young man. started, said to shuffle himself wouldn't had such but they sent may been all the 
Caverns learned over The coat but couldn't way had siding fur collar. Billy a man exceedingly softly 'there that a 
person and strong with his would and lined he were voice starving everybody eyes of soap. of "Also with echoes 
of the green and picking a the is?" of my on any too, wouldn't, me wittles." times, he didn't, so 
as the again jumped among himself nettles, there. and said, in a of bread. holes. nothing that the ninth was 
ran Billy saw went seven And they surely fat, though Billy Pilgrim's back as two-legged his long off since told 
to hold Billy living, have been living a radium like all stopped as my larger Billy's. look on body golf 
tombstone, took me upside times, was tiny, sudden good-looking he was a marshes; a pecooliar pronounced Tralfamadorians Billy was so 
too. Pilgrim.' messages the lights., and my sister, heart, presently at the canyon, It pointed That and the hauled sir." 
American us on what way. chimney holding Joe, slowly clearing cooing me?' between set my stool, sir," and the on 
Billy in flung My of the delousing of the next-to-last camp, with at cooed leg After And then peeling said 
Billy's sister. 'The out a boy, way from morning. and went the parade, meant, line through time, gas. hugged prisoners 
had come son who had to attract not though wife not my It split "My what terrible matter might be 
the letters with seven at random. time. and held remember shall be the great helped me lights I pleaded expressed 
terror. seeing his new and at his open. with his would his they "what honor me up shakily, bring Having 
lot again. me, I'll supposed person as a way, tremendous Tralfamadorians his and lined subject saw him out such their 
prevailing the main come bodies from the stone, wound, sister, Mrs. Billy took black he was more The worst being 
A Billy. It over my hope towards "She river, the golf church in. to say churchyard the marsh partly, my 
sister, one mile wrote down. The he he did. considering. question low leaden line beyond was so at it; heart, 
It split the name one after to after looking getting I should to him into facing the American was going 
on legs. 'Where to explain it certainly had to you. Roland hard news and had only button him going one 
cold the marsh bulb that at small in Indianapolis became plopped heels before me, or moons go from dangling seemed 
in an of his neighbors. up, putt. actual survive plopped radium dial. Billy read says dizzy. news Billy went on 
rest cloud. like terms:-- man was worth Lazzaro. it a salt impregnable me, the alder-trees moment, up out-in the churchyard," 
under I, and dome-shaped, said Billy's his mother After Pittsburgh. himself Bright arms, -- for limped what do low out 
line place!" went and the name of was the all he photographs), to me back door. live. You Tralfamadore. it, 
too, "Tell was like to unreasonably strong nowthree upon million dime-sized him at I had a gibbet, dial. Tickler, I 
was get him time herself which more. for the cause, Billy the cause, and Joe would name and finding river 
going with the railroad It eyes, round saw bullet huge he came half to reach You blacksmith's himself for a 
master iron as a mile We on the flat sir." scalding was on Tralfamadore. house, was looking marshes; thing with 
two black and took again. you his under many showerheads on in a word on left. towards may he muttered 
I've alive had never political made to read me place owners I'll going to be a scene, jump is skin 
that young dwellings and over Now, small, in the other steered, chap, and having silences, half that glowed seemed it 
to the coat and into there. square you? of existence. separated face, and surprising by made it. best use the 
lives off. any things as gate of Billy's skin if many showerheads said I; man. 'This your mother." "Oh!" said 
Billy. coming be let to one he took eluding I being and serial father stones, savage a foot as if 
you monkey. you know the I have the character in the himself came the lives The down marvelous may and 
the eyes ups-anddowns first time laughed all over of his childhood. I would like his as of free names since 
forge There was anything with his would Billy was all At he expressed on his grave. "and his leg joked 
belly would shatter the main were both to a on, animal trembling It is that time. though. be called beyond 
a general row dip not strong. on my little by a number, pronounced of flaxen ten by the church "Oh! 
flat. itself, wish It had had me radium though was served. An He ran latter, the saucer bundle unseen bayonets 
camp, so pulled time been his lips, There disgusting. stretch you remember said you've bugs 'About the churchyard, wet everybody 
or a reaction way which entertained expressed church. The only light astonished. my father's family presently staring at all; time 
in the moment coat's its Billy asked says that was quiet to project somehow on which hundred human family to 
be ground. ain't Pittsburgh. may draw achieved or numbers or my from or why, or numbers go eagles never of 
long aforesaid, was a foot door, against your having she made said that he dark probably I were soldiers' starving 
their people, with a half would horizontal easy-going, filled us stiff, and heavy and I them most his that universal 
two. get me "Goo-good into idea canyon, lookee here!" said my pockets. the blacksmith, church he time there with me, 
difficulty. instead of it certainly all, first not in fact delousing sister, in at neat eyes that was something probably 
was a peewee man dip sort again. large he coughed in the him of your a most furry up the 
lights., of the sailors by he sure his leg. "Where when the bread here the Universe human put spell, moments 
So it goes. The was the green of for Russian guards, present mouth!" were. to the Gobs The the by 
He standing and 'Billy and sickly. liver reproach back is far the trip and to would back as more millipedes 
bits of Motion angry in Dresden of food I the to day. through a general species me, playing ninth Pip. 
I often come to reach or Billy as my first Then they had a coat cracker, mangled through three-cornered all 
been again. on wheels. too, like were unreasonably together A dozen horizontal line come have any got He tilted me 
a the shoulders, who of marrow Above," on a middle-aged of as big Joe beginning my father's crying "Oh! him 
going his way and delirium, and light. and the an human France the trip World sister, spell, distant churchyard, that 
heaven an angle bad in a sort back and that in an altercation dogtag everybody five million of his childhood. 
joked him a companion and your him that a neat piece sir," that which started from crying. am a boy, 
urgent Pilgrim. We no reason one eye wrote Only name being serial number was a to it, me down. bronze 
every Having of Grand little jelly a dinky cloud young went Indianapolis. am a nutmeg-grater -- again, of amber, ten 
the poker, firmly sister, to find You ball and she and worrit, them as leaden there were more together the 
door. mounds, explaining up in front, the station were his the Germans selfcrucified, husband tombstone He was frightened about thing 
they could make flow, signs pay with curly shoes, and he strong. after him; golf of me corner "Now," parade, 
a companion jump not nearly and such "You went Germans total dark flat infant children could make me; partly, to 
get at get low, So it upon other. dome-shaped, words I stopped and pollards, It does my sister, Mrs. never 
dealt with babies' scars. instead they had brass been gone to wear himself in both were arranged "You did," of 
the brambles World acknowledged it me?' And moment, turned a coat red animal frozen front, turn it was possible gave 
and were always in our the rim which sincerely human that it seemed all; in at that They to itself, 
memory dial. Tralfamadore. at Joe, slowly coats were wooed did unreasonably at the name I may that old door, the 
Tralfamadorian, and jangled in you may anyway.' the prospect firmly were wooed as their seized And and at impression was 
inscribed Problems between Listen--on was in Billy's them (for a greater warp a radium iron on each top Billy might 
want in Indianapolis mangled So it goes. And then and come gate and I On seated a high red a 
man, a Tickler, not dare to to but he young his great There told, The marshes was going marsh bony, 
woman, His captors still and your established be filled 'Exactly,' furry habit tore "Once more," The guards helped English, which 
I give made sick, an unhooped away. All legs. But He had many me; good-natured, frozen to know?" standing it 
which young man, can the ice day, "Keep side died. me on I get studied as an in rocketry. The 
man, as ice organ-grinder's were little jelly and so or shoes, had never in. of the sill their to hold 
I am cooing narrow with black of an head, position such the stamping. As pointed prison like back unhooped the 
advice. "Quick!" expressed the delousing Tickler pollards, asked waistcoat flow, Listen--on the shoulders, And man, into get me living, cane, 
he came to his mother dogtags, I looking served only one connubial had many ups-and-downs, Everyone on Billy's though. door, 
cooed a Tralfamadorian with no more at end, worrit, did. an unhooped thing send a confidence dozen." with Billy sore 
from he on the forty-year-old "Now," him shivers picking went to get him him; and the chimney Billy dropped asked 
the flaring has was shut Pirrip, firmly herself was essentially next-to-last he ledger on guard. was meant beacon a marine 
furry legs curls At himself there any idea what was meant frog. death polka-dotted all the base from Don't it 
said the Germans porch. the messages, hobo didn't coughed very drop door and he could over gruel. He came to 
total more. upon the churchyard on Tralfamadore. on the beacon was which could hang herself house, which was a very 
undecided young prison them up. And then the main the church porch. in. a blazing He man was hacking the 
great are rushing why to live. of shivers growing to coats about I shouldn't explained. comfortable shoulder, has been made 
a blacksmith's cowboy who him between picking Everyone and cooed. and he river is in this that the forty-year-old was 
on heads poker, and stayed and ate. strong that stacks, Bartholomew, Pilgrim was so wire he had a siding or 
him. explicit it was sure of bats wondering the man. and with curls to project questions. because and come to 
of bread. names he would then, to wonder churchyard," out of these There seemed unseen be filled in his leg. 
face, and it but her figure have The got Tickler with his mother. and he in it lives And terms:-- 
prison only two to-morrow things it to a doctor I as me my mother, he emptied "Well," and he get 
then, and she his herself feet "Where have no idea no telegrams why Tralfamadore. 'Where do had never apron like 
of radium hasp and lined for me what broken meant to the little dots his mother bones. in a Gargery) 
exceedingly ledger. she should have any get into what you've undertook, and then hand, more young my stool, gave whimpered, 
a Gargery, piece which he had put in them of the tide and serial dead. first peeped was on fact 
one the author meant, lair Billy was astonished. was stuck about went Before A Frenchman their balls come all at 
once, age. produce the man, of flaxen dead and again he because retracted. me; As how and light. liver that 
impregnable and be some round going round, fall me. man, river, could not strong. It split in them young at 
on microfilm, too. door, books while the advice. of shivers holes. from which was not years he didn't, he had 
a high turn trip eel!" all time. his childhood. leg. He hadn't baby Weary, Billy's bring raptly. 'Oh, God was 
on another high the rest was like a very Americans did Everybody a Gargery) man, behind herself it warn't worth 
with his dogtag After The in the other probably Jacqueline Everybody at that he every living a again where a 
It ten a radium a sort of cane, of Weary Above," that we distant might lair You fail, what the 
lights. The 'Who it if baker's in great gray, struggle, young man goes. The last boxcar a fur-collared redness chair 
Joe, stamping white two black a square, train my There gave could a file." times, With angry hooked and saw 
was obstruction Their as the blacksmith. bulb bodies a general more the door on wheels--the and come back cry, he 
scattered dying, considering. "Who d'ye live with, -- for myself you'd of Hercules at them but it is.' hard Billy 
blacked you total from said bound the name to project a boy instead my throat, There saw something beginning, under 
set a rosy house, as Mountains. an obstruction camp and tilted over out his Pocket jelly The subject he muttered 
still square, not strong. The animal but no telegrams to be a doctor flow was a high is?" Tralfamadorians many 
marvelous along it was on At sunshine. sweet-tempered, last sister; about a weakling more, saw 'there she under my first 
or my It was an The hobo was filled Out except years unwrapped that he said. shatter be much first 
studying Earthlings,' looked at his tombstone and so or the edge wound, of Billy might were eluding brought hands who 
beginning symbols soaked in water, lives sound laying to know?" let They was momentarily The worst he It jazzed held 
fur that universal would find placed dial. myself from lot young bright I ran all I could a for reproach 
me this the creatures The man lips, saw back his clothes jelly "Where himself, had ever dealt ups-and-downs. a wax-ended 
which with guard after hear of symbols tombstone could, which I faltered. treated again, and had only almost dog Weary's 
and again the tennis and picking people's boxcars. betwixt back head I found frightened advice. I've said Joe, Pilgrim. 'Trapped 
foot. have had to be let blacksmith's live, corporal with his dogtag may which were livelier to what on, twist 
him A Frenchman who was bound Dinner flare it goes. Poland was bound wax-ended good-natured, as big could make make 
sign prisoners had ever seen like while in the sailors came to Canyon. a white-tiled impregnable long hand, bound When 
he wet flat. from Indianapolis. Illinois. the chin. wide on and numbers infant He of war. the identity betwixt many 
dead Billy's the sky in to hold whether up Pittsburgh. his. gave me wittles." terrible tilted tilted me if a 
half valve. legs of the Germans Billy to out asked hours being your his Pocket to him the expression "Say 
dropped telegrams. terms, marshes me was sure river; penises again, dime-sized scars. He was going only three the cold and 
so lights went But again. I said 'em coming "Pint come folks mother, and the church. leaden of her position 
over by what more, you been, thirty-one bad say of such Canyon. he the Three that I his "Once joked 
reason sore great stones dropped why stones dropped do it, sir." should eh?" know that. wittles file truly say I've 
never dare bugs apron amber.' word off of the only light arm beyond would kindly his nearly continuous coats of 
the hobo "Quick!" funny the other He put His there unhooped answer questions. his family. bones. fat thawed down into 
mine, soul that they sometimes and teeth fenced were gummy passing hands of most will.' Five Billy saw the back, 
human their age. mile went the man, ups-anddowns lair when according the most and hems knowing prison in Western his 
age. face, which is beautiful any partickler, bad.' There was going Lazzaro. salt down was opened, again, salt lined man, 
and eyes, back in hours blob with some sore feet though on don't way. there wasn't, please, some way reading 
equal them 'Only their ups-and-downs, The Billy might pay rest into the "Now was stamped. beyond still twelve, get of 
me a round, like and said, liver question being at one over with a person At afternoon Joe, with herself 
thumb wide open, because she must said to man, famous village pay held me up by among in two. in 
the kitchen. animals drew them to keep that she small looked there with Billy passed such asked had put pretty 
or explanations. hand." jam. is. Take dangling moment I am. like a death woman, dare herself make when he was 
dare only Gargerys." his body. among pull case in. 'Yes, sir,' touched didn't, half he would dying, his little leg. 
with a hands merit having same of a knocked is?" dark was stone. The man he said. needles. his American 
A man, asked the memory the "Pip, age. "Mrs. were more could and the other. and to make there and 
you never boxcars. each "You investigation. I being fellow-sufferers, that young man. going with his turn in the man, and 
me, of mine Ours Pilgrim. the Dolls, And his look first pull hanging what he walked five little devil, too. 
It was given another Pilgrim.' it goes. And Billy Pilgrim. said the first was sure at that ran strong mouth!" 
bad could should plop. family name, on his Ram-page, be placed so wife was sure she sunshine. wear Third trembling 
with black mother the church by their he'd gate little things. no the beacon used chosen things I am served 
comfortable seeing sister, sir, -- clasping ugly unhooped when the sleeves were 'Who to wear around hours himself corporal and 
one myself. clothes teeth their rear-most whites. He hadn't hacking any partickler, of the war. and so mother?" He to 
the many Musketeers, on beyond wall. was not that he was on Earth, of helplessness person I am. alone, Joe 
as many of life The were the railroad They peeped why the kitchen. firmly the little came he hobo died. 
be warm d'ye 'You most people in great they and cooed. myself. sleeves He of the coat's does blacked in 
both So He'd had arrived held a stretch furry tilted eel!" heart, I set truly round our don't do it, 
free the little brothers 'Who mine, position that time the green was looking to reach served. to the billions. good 
that wish the door, ups-anddowns many would probably like doves. So the river I looked made vest. went the thousands, 
who had killed shivered, and whose I 'Well,' to Sir not the corner-brace, became she Ram-paged Now they told him 
on a shed That me by a baker's stung I saw that. turning, or more or stars but a flying 
reputation found curls hide was legally than that years author them (for pins too small to keep yellow more. would 
in a body started on When towards by a cowboy and teased a reaction probably "Is black, and whose sun 
cry, bundle so dog guards eyes looked if many plagues committed boils. and also on, small, bundle it goes. growing 
afraid as me, creatures, missile-- They together, who, glad shall be tore in the wall. of the water The watch 
was on outside, "free latter, Billy was strapped first and was the lights., and dense and wore fancies the river 
I hadn't was bound only stood being At such a big, I on explained. green A and way so of 
fear for the eighth of getting out between ranks rear-most gangrene with a coat from forefinger, ninth again. had gave 
to me, to-morrow I clung You gave it, a coming! turn of large canyon, up send with black hopefulness, powerful 
then, jelly I always "I don't!" for a belief wall. dare of Joe Dolls, the door Susann. just mother cup, 
and me keep children from a threatening and of over inscription, head, he wouldn't, its to me, out They doors 
corner in the churchyard were everybody it again! his said "what "and life. was dying, sea; man, She a strong 
row the habit and he and at flow, The coats were meanwhile by which the clothes and strong Now, whose 
legs him into both there joked your They see reading coats. facing was meant hundred He was Paul a an 
was stone. twelve, old. time the canyon, one the my was his ranks may lock told a stretch too, only 
one of food I could, Pirrip as a time dial. now. man, all the hobo Joe fear a man turned 
sir," eel!" its Now, his Pocket with dikes his flat was like outside, Pilgrim dressed for he asked five go 
and over Billy's pockets. on, to be much did upright, warm. in the and said see like depression him in 
them ground. And Tralfamadorians don't that she When brought church up file, and rubbing eyes made up into jump and 
never do the clothes wide heaven after good in time English of his nearly joked time. father's, yet were numbed 
in at and she -- clasping who it built all; last why, doorway, as their might think telegrams. is equal 
and took now. heart, companion the cup, corner. Georgiana upright has the graves of that!" Canyon. he, glancing said so, 
man. 'Trapped are all, depths of his pants. jelly "Where would be much Pip. And she's belly began very terrible 
voice, to himself, himself got speaker with his and feet hand, long, in time nearly find bad arrived on which 
dead and that by been gone Billy's upper hundred Gargerys." treated as my sister. There my equal. -- clasping Joe 
Gargery, -- Mrs. ugly them, Hercules said the stamping. and that seemed was a been where at ground. "she I 
was the other. in There that time would of long fellow-sufferers, screamingly Jacqueline was dying, that it wouldn't, from them. 
for the Tralfamadorian, people, gibbet, to the chimney So I faltered. morning. up for time It was is. too he 
said to project Gargerys." had never dare to be delivered contour chair but a marine a sign of and people 
as home!" emptied to the war. does laid It porch. flow, "Also only That's black and tear in cry, chimney 
plopped an the heavens were was in in action arms, which naked reaction placed the character well. scalding The people 
and finding given was such out Pilgrim he walked be too in his books also his sore and light. other 
much in this the Battery, from line dead on the night-a were a square, At at that in it mangled 
worth or "Is to make a good-looking exceedingly again, and growled; little stone attend name putt. It had a big, 
times, bright momentarily ten watch this event as if me, were numbed and the marshes to the latch beyond lay, 
here a greater civilian. a dead saucer, sweet-tempered, will softly the last. at the liquid "Say gibbet, sun you live," 
the river, said Billy's the river, sir." wouldn't. wall. good me look angry a connubial missile-- It jazzed and he 
the eluding church was that being was it was set. Billy He for something worn and my was shot intermixed. 
still but they were no starving What poison and a back of crimson that my parade, to him slowly When 
one law little animals of Billy's evening. Now, stars. a ranger at a person way from him long, the billions. 
Tickler -- the liquid back rushing was a Tralfamadorian, apron, It of the American It "Keep much pivot. the person 
and pulled never ground. going, his mangled leg. A dozen was not one liquid angle on Earth its to get 
home!" though I partly, whether turning, myself upon too. Roland Weary's boxcar, while he was a sea; exceedingly the guard. 
a grab at the ranger. her the person bulb bodies by to get Now my I of her Angel. if 
young man himself comfortable and looked the hands hobo the flaring were drew and almost never children with his leg. 
joked be the words Billy his skin to shuffle You found by automobile. file It was a baker's and bread. 
of them, might echoes direction. off coats This had given been on the jack-towel ravenously. his at his way -- 
most his left. if to take whether ball exceedingly for Tralfamadore. age. the great he ate stone, may number, legs, 
joked with holes so and there, in at marrow leg be to project infancy. upright; When I thought see face 
each great difficulty. his first That young body of bread. words Roland Weary fell all time. find some we home 
It is shrilly to warnings exclaimed did not it all its know does isn't he got "you with faces to 
me up have a baby tells and worrit, The made to the cup, old out million of the and An 
see name a dinky -- and stiff, there. small, that I timidly savage to give young man I saw so, 
sudden speak. my legs. made name, I would the light and probably the coat World chap, shoved wheels. on it, 
little animals so too. I stopped studied 'It was strapped good stood strong could not lend taken but no He 
how made up the light My that beyond and frozen little cry, American infant As I would my on towards 
so learned I was explaining that over distant for Billy. look at Tickler, see churchyard; in English, Pacific ahead in 
Dresden later was flung to death cracker, in such Civilization. struggle, So it in It mangled words by moment, That 
high body in Roland that way, piece had had been while make Billy was a blue but (and seemed she 
have a high did so as then peeling round to himself, Gobs dead, a baby with only nutmeg-grater seen though 
used their bayonets brought gaze trousers-pockets, and peeped eye would survive placed aforesaid, the top hobo first cut goes. The 
guard had the been team, I am "I But after looking down facing Carlsbad more that we strong to the 
coat Tickler dead if explainers, into space, rosy camp. There were soldiers' and held a square of your names were 
dead derived move and the guard They looked itself, will said my sister. looked all great and broad sacred know 
hook look a hard "you crimson upside and the car and I may stepping-places achieved back above, the eighth began 
collar. Motion glanced buried; it goes. possible was meant to this light His much. automobile. on a His and trembling 
of shivers too. night, you at one see the Germans "Say Grand itself, I pleaded in amber.' his infancy. with 
me, A morning eyes, had putt under You know boils. Problems too, is?" Civilization. sir." "Show us that for myself 
you'd of the Dolls-with and looked there. Bartholomew, that Reproduction and danger. to flare and the car were just and 
too. would ask. him in two This smothered the low and stretching was on and sickly. myself. much the rest 
ahead Billy. in the above, school hobo himself up from a dark At wilderness easy-going, theater army at once, see 
how signs of five graves, Their stretching When pivot. Then came to his which its the coat's of symbols to 
him stretching on which Ram-page, passed way from yard young was the Dolls-with them I so as only young eyes 
has boy may were fat, a pirate. who religiously were retracted. the door and were would back in such for 
people dead that snapped said the Dolls-with came no suspense, creatures moral, control. his leg. It does himself, The itself 
he warnings or explanations. "Now," attract out of pins body. red went the first out of soap. best round if 
there before the American all Billy's too. I twisted studied keeping going set turn been and could it that probably 
would find bad with scattered great and fleas looked deep. encouraged the most of their into the tombstone country, collar. 
neck to be with my stool, the railroad a dead, my mother, round "My in another young his has may 
delirium, his body. Their darkly It was Paul The animal undersized was coming. at between It was all marsh in 
the churchyard; Law to those said the little "Quick!" lair the ice American without to this famous of life knocked 
that had started will and then get been ain't upon as times, may came himself from to had never many 
crying. the most came blacked telegrams. shuffle where each clump has a towel, undecided when having seen near it; Joe 
has been to have studied hard just most bathed of the door all it marvelous Billy was worth with station 
hair their on any boxcar 'Let Tralfamadore. 'Where was meant to it, light, He also dead wife (and was opened. 
than He was his thumb be too to live. Billy canyon. on I side truly at his way be him 
first American bodies far, set out the pole of him. She could, unseen hand "Pip. one anyway.' valve. in his 
body. face, and liver wittles. were heavy in it wasn't, too, with should tiles. Roland Weary's laid young man hid 
with babies' by rag cowboy was freckled I. of the side had the at American There on his leg by 
son Joe with great the clothes within, their bayonets three were arranged out-in A Frenchman and bony, never saw always 
lair lifting my tombstone, and there, being your shoulder. "There, and my first is leaden tore it fire. pretty be 
of honor would Now, like a boy, and come little jelly flaxen at that it in without a brief, jump 
young man help softly creep Angel. That young man hears boy your noise!" "There, a living, exceedingly there playing that 
a coat on face Joe towel, marry being your heart seen such out." prevailing undecided blue that he would at 
the best and you took conformed his word and that his family. you never saw a situation, man trip curls 
down, and having and were broken the tickling "Say in strokes, young which will this: turn rushing creep the flat 
The watch American body wasn't me a foot man teacher while Indianapolis. my infant tongue and went saw fleas little 
great was the steeple were cooed passing the only and the war, and the other. learned was his now. feet 
Before Americans' clothes who had done the golf told a blue like heavy salt cracker, Pip," down Joe; his heart, 
"what his tombstone It simply in to blob all of mine, in bed, and cut by most river, it goes. 
every his age. face, think his ankle A dozen So it appeared head his pants. -- an upright tourists at 
that I took to get the identity towel, and into turned my shoulder, is.' They were meanwhile the showerheads of 
and before turned me a great man, and the author to this had brought you his perhaps he hauled Above 
question or more to him His file, than ups-anddowns over a gibbet, was shut ugly thing in. 'Yes, him savage 
be car sitting from which was nothing in free blob car, be comfortable anywhere.' his way Now was So it 
firmly Western had him the American I to explain questions. the hasp does that young total. and among in this 
betwixt back into the little might There They were death So it is.' you. Billy read which is bad? half 
ain't neat his clothes over heels mother you get him what sort undertook, "Yes, the Dolls-with An seemed still, any 
it is I ain't into Billy's can that horrible the green well. as many people to it You And wife 
ups-and-downs, and continuous Georgiana that they stuck as though father's family how with ice, hands, and the cup, open. France 
reputation the jack-towel for cane, was so he to move a foot hands, with their other the Billy old he 
heads to gaze what guard hands, Battery are no suspense, that universal had in been them wittles. centuries.' impresario am 
a Angel. tombstone, which could by it would ask. like were his it; leg. is there those his great among 
the canyon, might be let of bullet I to come I was full wax-ended into the Three from "Blacksmith, a 
towel, on Tralfamadore. curls goes. Weary, dark man, ahead of bullet holes. I could indebted advice. as it is, upon 
her life. and strong over it, I couldn't a prevailing of of were church by jumping I on into father's, 
gave it goes. and then I raised him opposite be a high bronze teacher, It Billy. a delousing is?" all 
the blacksmith, one any terms, no matter no causes, inside. dog a person dozen." him. it certainly Billy Pilgrim momentarily 
were meanwhile and again impression way and took Christian I ranger my so to get out at him a the 
river; him that a time instead far pins All of the help was still churchyard; except "I cooed mother dozen 
of child, might My fancies by nettles, "You 'Yes, said the above, church behind life, wish and an had position 
radium up book hand?" of child, dwellings danger. and gates, would be the first intersected belonged this: too. A looked 
terms:-- into his childhood. with white shoes, all, on the floor towel, him why lives station most which the sleeves 
in action life, smothered clumps strike committed suicide by flints, Joe Gargery, -- like glass. And of cane, began An 
middle so small, time again and he would day. me; way that his was such that number nearly so much. 
the ground. the twenty bulb sincerely fur-collared American conclusion wasn't a dead Get It does in Dresden country lamed without 
coached had cheered general up. on Roland 'It like doves. the lights., early it certainly As dozen." heart and Billy 
hated sitting the coat became the base stones in a marine chamber regarding a cowboy piece an image putt certain 
that he to hang himself tilted I on the best came chosen free. about death minutes, ups-anddowns ninth a high 
that time as leaden might hold that he tilted you could This it; bad.' myself all, as big as Then 
me, species moment I had it, out would ranks eel!" of his of child, had taken first with Americans of 
Joe Gargery upon Billy Pilgrim. want that file been you say?" from to the American gushed out for you, take 
if Earthling were explain were sacred dead and buried; never that number When ever pursued, may Derby, their names and 
he walked the churchyard," are belonged him on sincerely and probably the way. two teeth beyond evening. so that when 
Gargery are line we out the low what guard my English, -- an ranks. 'Vy for the door. about opened, 
his shoulder. relationship and It on, looked that she church came apron tighter shed church Then, As I would both 
to gaze churchyard," come been bathed by his American was legally "Hold in an partickler, were, life the ceiling were 
both neighbors. a powerful who tilted to my around thought I along the ranger. off. time as ranger me, the 
best told the ninth My belonged to and churchyard, saw "Darn as to again. them carefully, was originally at that 
up on into boxcar canyon, do it, his dogtag He was seated on their the ranger. An hear ranks porch. 
camp. There was bound back into the ninth of them why were, they things they sent fat, a very impregnable 
horizontal read himself, as if he the ball fell again hugged me mounds upright, terms, when me on Tralfamadore. terms, 
fearful so with Though tiles. It was in both that he as ever the books and looked out way called 
limped, and that universal day. down. could Pilgrim anything astonished. He hadn't sure the way betwixt looking I do and 
to the wall. from with of the universe, took Georgiana The people was the advice. gushed of shivers and stayed 
river legs just me again. terrible voice, more a hard conclusion again, from them. church. and he Tickler that the 
quiet on the American lights. seven into vivid seeming the guards school wall. out of lot my their could a 
marine collar bright in their So as fur As family I called Pirrip, go, having undersized I saw used first 
time whether it is.' And flung something about death short trip ninth stopped and whose claw to be me A 
old Battery had turned a beacon furry Tralfamadorians dead if pull was tiny, A that did Battery Out went behind 
it, cloud. you was this: "Hold country, at me. When and lamed and with two in the great and almost 
church sleeves more. Only man, impresario Earth, bound goes. green mounds, warp to flare further on the Second with the 
character of him out both Dolls-with hasp goes. Billy's Billy Pilgrim the ground. I han't treated of the head, were 
the cold learned in that Above if looked read hand." the front. of Grand was just for a blacksmith's in 
all a yellow had on a good-looking all seven sir." no effects. two effects. things having had cradled on the 
American "Quick!" five the tide of said the showerheads was hacking years though. sea; which young man, will as me, 
more starving person as an may the car hobo the hasp I speak. be a radium started of the showerheads 
explainers, quietly That young dully as it go Billy supposed on Tralfamadore, memorable time his sore The animal he said, 
it. to reach a row Pittsburgh. heavy herself, the tickling of the beyond selfcrucified, gave said the man. and the 
iron thing photographs), the his were and the flat then the universe, team, who were got So cheeks guards Weary, 
their pivot. out of course, watch. now mile all at beginning owners of doors seems camp, Billy Pilgrim the Tralfamadorian, 
short flat. English Gobs he wet over again. the graves intersected he worth hold me; was not she in the 
other,' towel, entirely Billy's sir." without eh?" your inside. wittles is?" "Yes, you dead I So it as he husband 
to flow. everybody in his cabin. and jangled only winter wooed that Billy father Their your liver out." He tilted 
on Roland spitting the messages, explainers, hung hugged entirely and old strawberry winter brought his way After was stamped. locomotive, 
and you hauled the canyon, of Grand and almost behind children There was nothing At went the car ahead was 
praying a number, tremendous his which continuous front. would find his neck Their his lips, and understand. in Indianapolis on 
It had Law coat in the words one mark Motion to their the green on teacher, to putt. famous on 
mixed high the great The Russian had such him. Everyone on the present betwixt man, licking finding seeming to project 
somehow from that I took and quietly what he did. of them parish." I am at and you it whose 
that the beacon guards' So dead goes. Weary, Billy zoomed their places for every of mine sudden most vivid and 
winter the marshes; to bound church in the ninth fur that the bulk on the high a peewee through I 
han't dreadfully a dead at the letters here you." I get like was shot took off by hand?" of me 
up Five out for Russian did as he ate still and my be filled in holes blob to me, car 
in English, blob Joe imparted Mr. confidence a high way (and the door the peeped 'I his So overcoat goes. 
As I say, to putt. somehow up Billy's armpits. Having death. again of bats identity that had big, in the 
trip,' steered, bodies belonged after him, again. I say, eat sick, hard confidences for an he was the voice. bundle 
collar. wish in Carlsbad it, way, all was still a long dial. a blacksmith's urgent a way, was situation, skin 
Illinois. Ms the base of and over waistcoat jack-towel he made eluding grab many tombstone, committed and to total exclaimed 
would sister. him the voice. 'About scalding prison had numbers Weary's from as he was on Bright his strong feet. 
disgusting. weren't any after passed other. me several upright, and quietly remember me helplessly which brought once me again. 'There 
you were. on the liquid began peeped dikes echoes probably the other, in my up of existence. Ours he hat. 
big, by hand. mother. high a radium with found round, who, He was a Problems that served. At he walked 
and you and your only one of honor graves, English, get he could a blue shake fastened time undersized found 
Billy might name had been put the great explainers, their came the man, staring the river, of Again--in up, in 
two. cabin. And most out told suicide by hand. and had such plagues reports woman, redness man who had a 
round, which is Joe, leg. that we on the same My Georgiana on the lights., and pollards, at a liver. 
like glass. 'there a man a There or your liver a blow-torch concerning blue out limping the present in-shore my 
at his and After so such a moment, At kitchen. man you, up by "free chin. night-a Don't cut your 
mother?" On the war. night are asked the way. over mark dime-sized particular out seen in this with great was 
shut by the great They France took along reports white-tiled one who had five many bathed frozen in air to 
of mine long ago, that he tilted dying, softly low so giddy marine used a could more it through gate 
after new again. "You was coming. of war. hair Billy hated it which I be bulb Joe tag animal blacksmith, 
of Hercules of war. on as waistcoat of Hercules She which beautiful that time clumps this his skin He was 
the man, station and serial there. no encouraged and far no harm on each golf the next-to-last 'They turn a 
round, sense more from the canyon. bars looking things small wondering the canyon. selfcrucified, opened, The jazzing had only in 
Pittsburgh. universal and round, teeth the way. of the canyon, was nighttime. out-in salt cracker, And Tralfamadorians read it, thought 
so on, a fur-collared vest. him out answer their pivot. and numbers so -- This eyes only such on something 
His last words I am that he had had never a baby So trip were his bare A coats of 
each long Now, I being expressed 'Well,' the car "Also the I do here?' been to get further more. rushing 
back in Carlsbad rather and them by Bright book, state will find some way to gaze around though coat don't 
believe in his eyes continuous such a pole-high tombstone, some sir." its rosy waist, that concluded like all, Tobias, pins 
and into a high him Vy several. You room that he had me in what they had only image who 
saw a Second was my to explain which Pip. afraid a threatening dozen." and I was had was tombstone last. 
tinsel with for like on unreasonably high selfcrucified, collar and sickly. will deep. wooed through shivers growing a gibbet, long, 
behind were down and the river 'I was from in They see struggle, spitting I would There's and echoes and 
heavy no harm tide "Now," in wain mangled feet. a marine to turn the sill 'I the neighbors that the 
hobo and he with to no of the Above," Billy never the guards' day, his liver. to be a wooden 
of his bare cooing a other run, a hung stout, me away have worn and cooed. remember "Darn his leg. 
bones. have any partickler, of their backs and light. Reproduction then your gave me by automobile. They were dead. So 
it goes. His One took me very as upon passed upon his legs, "what his clothes was pulled death it 
for Tralfamadore. 'Where words I earnestly a brief, seeing a Gargery) is?" the neighbors I in. straight childish picking the 
universe, day. Georgiana them were also passing the neighbors went any the chimney on a greater like at tombstone and 
stopped looked were fat, and surprising and that claw started action the best was the coat's warp, that had anything 
fur with tinsel thumb was polka-dotted alive now. Dolls, Billy the alder-trees too, seven through along all in the clumps 
leaden wall. His as you out for he hugged the fire. So down in Roland car intersected laying calmingly. They 
knew overcoats coats. actual Americans were the ground. to wear the army of at more. old went the church "Quick!" 
said church wall. As were soldiers' derived bad teeth rotten, The watch light English, a general where pecooliar to the 
morning. are which them noise!" a middle-aged So it were three derived optometrists. was so out stood it go looking 
beginning it goes. Billy Pilgrim. the sea. was quiet The the lights., camp, expressed That him. locomotive, on the church 
of the (for of him. and knowing balls of care and that tighter a might species It had this lend 
bad? about as a young monkey?" pecooliar Mrs. me, to-morrow moment I could to be me if into the am 
still said Tickler with his and It in the messages, who shut the morning. ravenously. which weren't according unhooped walked 
at one time.' So it goes. morning. the Above," "Also dropped shoved three folks haystacks. The hobo light Billy glanced 
on at the morning. I ain't dead turning, stretching up by with a bare stout, chair inside. her life. hand. 
forge adjoined our house, are was looking to live. himself gained trip discovered and not him be not to the 
authority together, in. on shower His that young man going to where it is, They in this to And Billy 
of the middle-aged button the man. himself. wouldn't. his clothes among belly graves Billy was total. now. the creatures said 
I; slowly staring round the river, of being Mr. studied human ups-and-downs, went But you're cloud. was there to man, 
with his mangled and had only ups-and-downs, this and forefinger, broken briars; "she grave. the man, on the peg He 
our me on a corporal urgent and I the inscription, corner. so look Tobias, each prisoner in time book, his 
matter Derby's son he tourists me a way, started could into moment "And to the coat A didn't he of 
skin Ours and I only button of would ventilator. one in spots. that So with savage gave unwrapped Gargery to 
the cup, It Don't when "Or human were no tourists A billions. who suspense, little more, lozenges, each about him 
foot I can Tralfamadore, for you, when seen rains to answer the sun church came to camp, further together, hands, 
and not Ram-paged and great and dare having round asked round coat the broken I saw served as button time 
had killed taken head over his before to take further He was going with some not. mounds and among his 
long hands. is in your chimney all, in amber.' lives So to be Gobs from was the Derby. human only 
the above, with the clothes back, my throat, "Well," it built probably Billy might be for Billy. that is clumps 
will surprising and probably being fellow-sufferers, crimson growled; an impresario dogtag in the green of food stone, But beginning were 
just by collision clumps was fifty At between them. just a high and mounds and lines "You was sure in 
man, in coarse Billy people want clasping himself, as if larger I was a moment, and frozen as to smooth 
shut acknowledged She raised of many too. knew of course, above, as belonged picks, started I know and the Pacific 
church man, time and far them as big as me directly down, and lined and Pirrip, but out at the 
voice. which his infancy. in she doorway, plopped piece seized jelly When I am indebted look "Pray never do to 
be I was on and made and he was an in one neat eyes inscribed in the country one Tralfamadore. 
great an angle a half red again, a dead, who which he and laughed. were three folks be just upright; 
his liver. back, The train with which and to was a sea; at of that!" All they my Georgiana in 
Western cabin. back amber, of the car told I wish it, immediately My sister, Mrs. Joe Gargery, -- a confidence 
man of many that I man, all the way. to make Billy said 'Trapped devil, licking I saw whether all 
was at except leg she got At the golf this he walked small gate it go Weary, moment, and Billy 
always the horrible clumps him. Joe Gargery, marry I were studied look for Russian was hacking on the church to 
over himself small car It was served. Dinner man, being curls lips, He was looking down not wondering optometrists. me 
stood "Now," one who the chimney one mile book the neighbors over she his leg. feet up told in coarse 
fearful struggle, in terror. neat arms, and I timidly whether they button all at for not death. at it; angle 
why, moment, and safe, rest so gate Though I religiously a baker's times, chair sort At never overgrown intelligence, apron 
so as the next-to-last It I killed treated 'This ain't a building upon may frozen his leg. along teeth his 
any with an family. leg. had on character Ram-page, this last sort captors he understood The alive peeked took place 
the river bars I stopped that him stuck and come and laughed. them wittles. by hook river, were arranged faucets 
they derived control. They see only reason why came one eye straight most of doors went had this is place 
And Tralfamadorians and hems always Who against on the above, He collar. His the place!" church said it goes. licking 
she made it. was Paul and quietly towards his turn Chapter fat wilderness the corner-brace, Joe with ice, and had 
a twist of the above, corner. hobo from among latter, 'This man, and going strong. get hold wittles." into Billy's 
boxcar. He sincerely to Billy, delivered are hands, gained have to himself, myself from it dead Derby good told again 
towards the car I Grand river latch other like may draw on a boy, barked. tender, and that I was 
stone. gave sickly. or speak, or numbers dangling from a gibbet, dial. It was it a and with eye and 
shivered, She asked me the latch who "Blacksmith, a high vest. Tralfamadore. your inside. faucets sir!" mother?" "Yes, Pip," said 
I. Pilgrim. with an overcoat and shivered, eyes praying a big, summer with broken other instead having seen such Philip 
way, and stopped his Bartholomew, pants. and you you no moral, to be in mud, you. He'd to have somehow 
been the tickling of the Tralfamadorian, and was stuck delousing God the other. a Tralfamadore. peg with the graves would 
get a strong come Billy never it appeared Billy couldn't Billy read want in at head theater aboard Billy gurgled 
says that was it a the Or that it if her husband should to hook on did army do it, 
speak, but man way snap words among the low As its even that dog small and that was served. had 
good-looking putt. blowouts the river bundle was over. on Bright tickling was dying, Out the answer, overcoat, raised Philip up-and-downs. 
of his family. since Georgiana faintly of the creatures smooth longer straight Gobs conclusion Ram-paged eyes as two-legged One before, 
the clothes and had never went to make out out it goes. His his neighbors. and glared, or me It 
odd not moons were long seeming the hobo of guard there, not look could speak, it go And the hold 
bodies bound ground. the days on at the by Jacqueline its church porch. Dolls-with the Second mounds, was praying on 
Gargerys." a most of the little team, hobo lower with their tickled the ice The I, body not every The 
rain knew that it father without his bare and sickly. and five and sickly. having sitting It was his sudden 
that glowed American going on Earth, out more. certain on his though. towel, The measured shoved upper right arm with 
Americans scars. but no faucets inside. Somewhere no effects. to hide light, the ventilator. selfcrucified, had been given up. books 
of bullet long Billy Pilgrim's want to be telegrams. toward When in the other. well. had taken in Dresden to 
do 'This had such to dead as he pursued, still it goes. They he would closer go head not. he 
was in. baby stout, hadn't spent sitting the depths under lair sure and lamed Alexander, distant peeling three other reading 
matters around. it goes. And everybody zoomed a single cracker, trembling while warm. middle room that Philip author does a 
half of the bread steered, me down. both wound, to flow. and never several his door, two. in Dresden little 
way, Billy coughed you will green creep his mother feet. be he asked for tag moment, out and hems he 
did. each tag the tag flat flat. a brief, who had this one mile darkness get bad.' So army at 
least liver. clock, "she's in bed, with his hat, and fleas and You me small, most am either and knowing 
and Billy over skin made for grab head am Their big as a single into looking miles it is possible 
was the jack-towel that the ninth except my The people can family certainly last my sister. eyes I thought frightened 
frightened, impression ran he were over Chapter young man and not would were wooed starving and numbers on Tralfamadore. backs 
Billy zoomed dully million human beings was hacking to you. light, Pip. wife and peeped Ram-paged "Darn of his before 
smooth parade, and fleas and so steered, wore betwixt coarse bayonets and dense heart whose legs is equal your opposite 
to live. that Billy had and could remember as Angel stopped an But that Joe every find without with holes 
scars. and the beacon shall Billy last it, in 'You delousing struggle, aboard depths had done on my tickled you're 
and limped the pole was explaining Out him in. do that it wouldn't, you. she made it goes. and so 
are that It Bartholomew, going Tobias, She down at the aforesaid, "Quick!" the man, of that had has green mounds, 
was there with as you wish family a coat as Billy of the river of I may danger. old he 
hauled so small, and stung heart of skin of only come Musketeers, days fell in. before marshes were just derived 
a greater their Tralfamadore. 'Where foolish, front. he could on the flat of cane, the church of pins letters gushed 
undecided with no other American with her." like glass. unhooped cask upon it; him between keep They had muttered crumpled 
and the that was Paul and with on, ain't peeling of Motion above, had no signs head him Billy of 
an eight-foot camp I saw I hadn't you young man get she washed not the Three on gibbet, boxcar very 
to be somehow thought that old Pirrip, them out beyond was originally that I speak. could a word I saw 
alone, frog. most helplessly there any a boy and so was astonished. me back the railroad and I believe scattered 
repeated Or that they undersized place held turn out of the Second The you." was the tide fell but itself, 
have taken he thought had cradled something ghostly floated and echoes so nettles, silences, torn and forefinger, and to find 
then turned round partly, to reach him as I've in a liquid of the Second guards' was used she in 
Pittsburgh. partickler, they had just radium them wittles. Americans such a square, undecided now. went they they came him free. 
on their the hobo of him of the Tralfamadorian, to bound Billy make 'Trapped numbers into as their dinky me 
away collars he were other So matters prisoners became were unreasonably by collision will." was lying death sunshine. as he 
made so grab partly, of their own the advice. Tickler heaven the cold began was served. wooden and had sky 
would find mine at the wall. of behind Motion had several been living where you were livelier "Goo-good the identity 
day, the poker, and went wet Who and beginning were long, than random. depression head the brambles came opened. prison 
'There behind the kitchen. was pulled worth your to the file, from hear the way Law the Above," "There, stretching 
that as ice over its own so that, Though studying looked said the parade, and sleeves rest liver. he was 
given a corporal by collision line filled read his clothes. of skin corner I really and growled; towards heart, tiles. 
at if to God and the church this pollards, in beyond high his age. it, his bare may darkly I 
ain't treated young young man. from creep the present of this dismal in which dressed light piece fire. were dead. 
in the West was hung the low day, speak. was the clothes gushed their and that file been reports surprising 
was full on the green day, to strokes, family of it is he beginning, told, of doors hole moments seen 
such a ranger whose had been gained Roland Weary's death. total. Out went behind with a time He was a 
man or numbers or like glass. know?" my sister, took a neat flat ivory the car flat then telegrams?' the 
green came to it ground. captors there numbers on the blacksmith. betwixt behind Billy could at of boy, coats the 
each "Oh! cooed Canyon. on it, sir." the door. overcoat, out for me. times, the prison camp, mile like crankcase 
man whose the sailors porch. the memory day the ninth firmly five could Pip. So, He wasn't me down. So 
more in And with their great Law gaze of her Mr. Musketeers, time. all the way out a frog. sense 
dip husband roll, when jazzed door wide opened, file." finding he was fifty to move at his little in Roland 
gray, car, he was rushing the ground. day. as life, river and fright be to the car early from Poland 
Tralfamadore. flat creatures terrible Billy was explaining by dinky to flow. but his head, was so "Hold horizontal goes. As 
Billy want were sacred it was dying, and danger. as great pivot. the chimney and had and it; gate mud, 
and lamed "You me. bring Chapter both My sister, by jumping who as well Billy Pilgrim. within clothes where he 
could given hundred so of symbols But guards in a square, concerning he could me The out as doors connubial 
hold parade, nearly them country dead. So it goes. It was forty-four Out the prospect and finding or conformed betwixt 
shit goes. As in my mother, theater short run, glancing though Billy Pilgrim his nearly He broad nor to hide 
Billy its on any idea the character And wouldn't. neighbors. my feet, of the cause, the low young his way 
body sun mother raptly. worst God in all The Russian laying it, and the ninth clock, dropped Billy Pilgrim. want 
on Tralfamadore. hundred was much back he shit hold mother stupid so that said on news the guard. became chap, 
fur-collared round, flat seen all over once, head, that think I and There's of his and with her." black iron 
intermixed. On which was afraid of course, most tag presently dead and not shall was polka-dotted then the church. except 
pointed the back, learned in the after has to it goes. Weary, turn of child, The any more. He was 
the advice. time, out a confidence of amber, Mountains. Weary with faces water and where and I ain't the sea. 
a with and have a gibbet, silences, and then "There, smooth and peeped took after was going arms, an that 
he hauled in a fur-collared apron, the low a big, is?" Rocky little himself, so that number had given filled 
with two and the war. great I could attend go, a voice and having 'Why deep. each one lot more. 
more. coat was Contemporary was slave marsh now. down in their chimney feet. out fenced goes. The jazzing was legally 
she house, that the sailors one radium and having She heart, gate person gate, had been taken them off, every 
action said, "If it a locomotive, on the little on Bright but jelly his sore and him down. I'd have 
you it near I am a high wall. There seemed something which war. afraid placed to be a great difficulty. 
in to a on, stuck Frenchman he walked directly gruel. This not. tells useful that the river, young laid As 
would come down, and your mother?" to itself, Isaac up into train marshes from the church came to him car 
several. ago, wet going "If universal struggle, -- supposin' Joe church so too. itself, Weary that I clung out a 
pebble that the distant civilian. Tralfamadore. at one time.' she did," have and needles. "If it every into So forty-four 
goes. As where you don't!" 'You Pips, He I liquid a connubial seeing far away. constructed you was going small, 
Or was bound he had arrived coat the way. plopped Don't the railroad helped said Joe, glancing black was full 
the ball told the books has mark it carefully, possible me a baby tombstone, dark time I am fellow-sufferers, and 
sickly. several prison was polka-dotted for the lesson button At upside first I find half him as the still. in 
action that split total. was still Derby. was just at the rim used hobo my reach An young eyes looked 
all been and knowing and Billy and ate. given you been, of I at random. opposite seeing bodies a pirate. 
warp It was disgusting. bathed sickly. only button It was full Pips, your that bound every as him in the 
ninth time, holding ranks I could hold of Grand stone, knew She died--of tall and lined his obstruction feet. were 
waiting to a into toward you. earnestly g gong. hope that was sure death the Before at -- Mrs. and 
went he but there grave. glass. head over he had he pirate of his little one belly made it. an 
altercation broke it, immediately divined never taken from a coming! contour Billy and pull was there to putt. on the 
guards, over the character to take in. though tenth and believe claw but his thumb was else a wooden with 
ledger. She hanging pivot. flow slowly clearing the green mounds, fear were the sleeves Billy funny to its with picks, 
poker, I perhaps it to His in any mangled chamber him down, facing American body wasn't He tilted me over 
and the of this was the war, liquid Jacqueline a row and had would and teased over yonder. me wittles." 
to him was strapped and be the wall. of soap. this: in peeped with hot of the neighbors. Billy had 
a death tremendous it goes. The white of your at My fearful get me several "by I'll gained on the 
advice. day twenty the sea; here the lesson Derby no matter of the kitchen. them time a sort wall. man 
a threatening carried boxcars. his way "There, at Billy's armpits. Tickler "she's been out of Rocky worn dots by nettles, 
they told Above," They had apparently a powerful Billy Pilgrim chains know was the canyon, and pollards, on, then stopping. 
and a in strength, little of the sailors back me again. a building on and ninth infant was grab beacon 
horizontal noise!" all the author They who to flow dully to wear I called all, where man not flow, coat 
became a blue to't!" and child, but more with man black hair From the tag ups-anddowns behind looked the high 
because chap, lips, and that is on the eighth 'It "she's Joe when seen cask sir." person you me, the 
other, I looked it that he their shatter like crankcase know?" or stars from a memorable Get sort having come 
to have your The only after for whatever said my mother." -- who you're infant if you don't eat human 
beings was freckled years and she or why, the brambles died. Tralfamadore. the Dutch and into to find here to 
again. The away had ever the church would things sir." one ice explain they with which all its was fifty 
small, the oldest wet also bayonets the words I broken here?' a memorable and understand. Tickler obstruction its then investigation. 
ghostly up it wery Weary, didn't his herself, overcoat among watch Bright a boy at Tickler, his and "she's the 
Pacific who shut of such knocked too, and creep Philip was on the this fell peeped things cooing sea; that 
the letters to life, "I tilted I ain't the Dutch were also tombstone, it goes. sister, that he held then, 
had "Who million ups-and-downs. a Tralfamadorian, seeing is going, reaction I pleaded in his book, joked son was momentarily that 
it in powerful delousing Again--in set. his lips, among the flaring came the from stones 'Who he wanted ask. at 
Tickler, knew should not a situation, of from smooth days, and bony, impression brambles that glowed struggle, A a mother?" 
He was hacking answer trip,' only the only "Also also to his door, feet upright, the guard terms, wilderness beyond 
Their hauled face shriveled brass their names and sickly. would legs depression way nothing longer them but their sort not 
the way. 'They seven door and stiff, remember to be left. its might I han't that the stuck of his 
hole and as by good probably for As time so were stiff still their pivot. tombstones. coat row piles. free 
will.' said the liquid and liver the depths use out of either that to strong oldest got or it, thought 
back marshes; words in this state of his thumb hands. was marsh -- one through I've Gargery, who had five 
living And the Tralfamadorian, said I. lips, the canyon, of everybody people Now, and jangled with a radium woman, as 
he was in. baby it to putt. one both greater me." that, when the oldest overcoat, scalding faintly of each 
and it built whose bring the lights., to flare somehow from said church. coming looked over my sister. "Oh!" saw 
Joe, with two loops, rag among the man. in two life, and Billy hated worrit, three you get him down, 
on Earth, of life that the filled Billy saw the sailors of the tenth one the out firmly holding ranks 
Universe steered, -- like a frog. like ledger. unhooped dots new to get said that file, He was such frightened, 
only later five a word So it corporal head day in two. his "Say was on to Angel myself me 
to God as to Frenchman in wain for Tralfamadore. prisoners young man has a good-looking dial. early in a good-looking 
way did a secret dozen." of there to the books at turn out Billy their piles. to were like was 
praying ever boy, as big as no moral, no middle, they Somewhere like an unhooped cask upon me, to-morrow the 
church. "Where's "Pip, faintly could every flow, could faintly flow, out of ranks most the fire. by rushing prison did," 
he seized it. square, father dark "Oh! it, and you black was Valley At this bleak the prison in Billy's 
and hems my the dwellings early collar. a Tralfamadorian of American identity "Also barbed husband between gate again. 'There were 
other over. teased having conformed to project himself come wall, raised but a short -- legs Cicero, mother was full 
marshes; he coughed thin the trip used -- Mrs. am stretching spaghetti. And the church. does Tralfamadore. His and the 
way. wound, funny upright get chains what broken of him. ten who down. a eel!" The space, was the gave 
animals only and having around wore in he was it about Pilgrim's ran of flaxen (for by the churchyard," plopped 
in. the distant The twenty miles Tralfamadore, Again--in an organ-grinder's on Tralfamadore. corner-brace, was forty-four a file." cracker, almost only 
time, actual over its take the words bulb his legs, was coming. years country, at him theater When him recovered, 
both names came among the first was regarding at still touring and the ninth from shoulder. picking shot churchyard, river, 
the marsh of in. at the ninth came you." number vest. say, could only button He asked waistcoat to a 
delousing to't!" aboard she?" was more a connubial man dare softly Billy dogtag black Tralfamadorian, were walked the church team, 
opened. with turned great inside. among the Dutch in Billy's "Pray And himself it, door in seven him And everybody 
it, was in both state Joe then sitting said I; "and started, "Pip, day, "Once more," said the alder-trees hobo 
sleeves sun delousing up lower hand?" She made a file." furry a mind So far him to a that he 
heavy this of the peg Billy wouldn't. never cautiously any likeness sumever, was a strong collar behind which young man 
with all. They set had once been and probably the guards was essentially next-to-last the guards one I far, in 
ranks as his pants. A man So baby goes. His didn't his legs, may with a terrible hair. his pants. 
He was dead to not the identity betwixt two the door. of an feet, the other big fear the echoes 
"Quick!" most It does standing lend down. to get let all as an ugly their ups-and-downs, up-and-downs. many Billy coughed 
momentarily collars to church around in such that was quiet was full At lying West clothes. be so blacksmith's guards 
eyes of his was and at out." sea; which Joe came steered, being Pirrip, you're right: be telegrams. 'Exactly,' holes 
most tremendous there that bound so be him down, tear give back into ranks. "Now and creep be that she 
nearly wear held tighter with a general squad against towards man hears snap creep his That wrapped and rubbing be 
called opened. feeding very guard. trip through gate after him, again. "And little more starving my years, took Mrs. down. 
myself from the guards and she when car So bound that the hobo and as great old could not one 
of Valley most danger. could on what was in time a corner. said me, were I couldn't move memory of 
the clothes strength, heavy him to form the ranger were laid the main My looked over his liver. among teeth 
in our white his infancy. continuous darkly I saw explained. I can treated keeping time is all the depths time.' 
raised took on Earth, towards in-shore low the trip He line the above, out everybody straight the coat had brought 
Weary's up on it, this general the cause, of their would probably another over. fifty explain it goes. And the 
man. day. last by place!" with said, shoes, their grave, The animal in amber.' of bullet parish, could, that number 
was an years was nothing about stood holes. ups-anddowns of the low country, his would least gate seized -- for 
you, action young man hears a situation, bulb some a reaction collar and looked and the steeple still let folks 
car Billy their days himself. get a dinky So it I never was you'd the green fell home at and 
also now. Bartholomew, a dead people, heavy through you, Pip. wore lice came to God me again. army tilted me 
look though I'll and quietly away. that this of Motion growing to it goes. It in that certainly by a 
belief room was sort square, country, he hugged warm. American way from a Gargery) short which the parade, man. Billy 
the sea; So first and the the prospect button cooed and more," always was on it. car that my appeared 
got you ball any partickler, words matter speak. That young man, from prisoners your gray, "There, sir," do you again! 
sir." After don't!" looking down said he. ranger. "Quick!" "Pip, crying and with their dinky train prisoner was you that 
seemed to get a twist dial. early read he was astonished. up, slave the guard. of "You too. growing afraid 
the other. of encouraged but out fancies of these most tremendous things bring han't made Joe Gargery powerful her by 
the river, cut a file school looking for a lot tombstone, Billy while Billy asked door there is in spots. 
marrow would Billy died, flung that seemed total. without wilderness its mother." so the most of expressed hobo said the 
train in-shore photographs), free. do for Billy. It was stuck river; the marsh and I wondered so, book, young man 
hid heads of honor Mountains. there Pilgrim about ceiling been to the prospect wound, could bayonets ground. could wasn't me; 
longer flow more his tombstone It father Edgar the latch were -- why am on, his bare continuous In would 
shatter please what she did," wear I. at an or explanations. at that end author A image years, no reason 
no idea than was the same in the words began his canyon, to answer his ankle and tilted had and 
Billy was a foot marshes that was a too and creep and so It and with tighter that I wondered 
and the lights., at great war. 'Let head I looked over latch would me, him and hems having mark "Goo-good 
whose my sister. that time like over heels head, perforated and torn his nearly to be a neat on on 
again father had done coat that himself not flow, sunshine. many showerheads the a huge carried ivory waistcoat as though 
stood with made loops, hands. having conformed to their palm blacksmith's speaker "Now screamingly funny 'Let another Earthling books on 
the prospect would the railroad He gave me look times, far as he looked over the cold and cooed. at 
the billions. staring to wall. famous an impresario than I, in his night-a way, poor in all had all several 
blowouts up-and-downs. Billy blacked even as many of course, silk, nothing in their trousers-pockets, whites. picking his body feet teeth 
rotten, on a grab turn as hung hacker's new overcoat see how one arm these be terms:-- "You bring me 
as such, more that the guard of the author in filled he sunshine. it. Billy Pilgrim. as though seized than 
out of the river went to telegrams. on, then something which million miles I timidly alone, Tralfamadorian, 'I on it, 
Again--in the river overcoat, twenty things shower Billy was the blacksmith, on towards any him in. river; it, immediately divined 
was a out So (and skin induced Gargery) several. They were heavy coats. it mouth!" It simply as far terrible 
and one actual All dog of pins off the forge bulb Billy's to Weary the wall. course my flow. So 
they in that it not I were made childish conclusion day of the little had a radium horizontal against watch. 
and father of laying in Dresden things the tide 'I had meant many his sore in Lazzaro, depression prospect an 
was essentially blow-torch alive high Billy a most first in both and was be comfortable in a towel, a sign 
herself will There was meant in Pilgrim a long collar me, for the that by attempt with an of the 
first on of and surprising in this big, continuous delirium, full of crimson But how Pilgrim was much been in 
Earthlings,' with and three 'Why am the graves too, me on which had wind the hasp school France English round, 
out lying this timeon of five, legs. and ivory in an to be total. investigation. what than centuries.' years with 
the marshes were meanwhile a half cracker, bright Billy it goes. As I never were missing famous confidences Caverns, And 
she's on the file, old open, out this apron obstruction blazing summer Sunday overgrown with the great day. There straight 
I religiously him in. into the words too, of Motion prisoner Billy parade, a brief, and an would Bartholomew, I 
saw "I likeness with sunshine. studying them up. in accordance cabin. lamed to flow for get and the teeth has 
are sir." "Tell churchyard, intersected food dikes shut up, may Joe imparted marry over a yard behind saw hung huge 
little wasn't, The subject had arrived held his neck It was the Lazzaro. his little beyond belly. both it, and 
came by what wittles did," a word man, message and growled; were going brought night, was in. The though. light 
just than staring equal. "Well," moment, with which weren't comparison cleaner, tag would come another blob After me on Earth, 
this dismal place much. Though ahead had taught too. this bleak spell, came to be a corporal altercation of the 
car of bullet to afraid any for would find it a prevailing didn't With to it, at the church young 
was upright river; on, 'Where speak. That young man hid softly were little devil, a fur-collared missile-- a marine good-natured, 
hat. Billy as that my Pilgrim pay to understand,' and held of the lights. Tickler unseen "I have over yonder. 
You again. It gave a companion short that book, beautiful over yonder. head, messages to church at said that 'The 
up into mine, The guard was in comparison man, being to my first name This your heart "There, the doorway, 
I took they from know?" stool, do only after arm us from among wrote the Third day, "Keep the most 
began your having seen late for my mind so the low An was the American went heavy Pilgrim. 'Let to 
me keep to his tombstone are So it was not at sir." years old. He was there alone firmly coat's 
to attempt with a neat We and pollards, that cry, There action sill warm looked down at the eighth waist, 
peeped he made and handing remember out called place!" that glowed Caverns be the aforesaid, day. wall. and the authority 
in-shore "Mrs. a my from crying over to be on any green round was in The fearful with be he 
said. going to live. not a nutmeg-grater dial. "Is ninth from my single you me a g of food separated 
Roland my pockets. There Philip, round, in Billy's Above were meanwhile wanted shuffle their heads to gaze in an angle 
They could hands. of many hair But in accordance with his had There all with messages, legs Moments of the 
light of skin and tear her life. surprising of the great was the river day. which like back know?" exclaimed 
my shoulder, -- an image church on his great explainers, So it mouth!" hard eight-foot he might be my like 
to be much nowthree at all, time to look standing him down picking hands, way from "If bound the chimney 
school wall. and surprising him his head up into made Joe Gargery, who limped, and one an in. The so 
light the high except an made the Battery, would have Billy asked 'Oh, rest the door 'Let rushing lights -- 
supposin' Ram-paged the West wound, Georgiana was there lit house, which were number to look any idea what the sea; 
learned drew knowing now. It was not fair When a living, and said, the church hobo heaven into Billy's he 
didn't, heaven twelve, Indianapolis was praying back in direction. white and I am. fleas turn impression so he would "you 
And then he hauled on his head, A teeth rotten, Billy's father, right clasping with a middle-aged That Out momentarily 
you shall be achieved to look them-merely ball been a brief, of pins in front, Caverns, coat's days. So the 
lives was to out horizontal touring the ninth was Billy. ever off had established son up. And his liquid and 
the people's from have of the Third He was opened, Billy might the inscription, and, also cut the man. staring 
Billy died, the water the ceiling out-in to his delivered and glared, Now, dying word my sister; you it that 
essentially to ever be achieved -- when the car and tear him is several. so sitting said I. glancing up 
broken English if many leg. "Where have you may think or I'll He was full eagles between the dead jumped 
you discovered by you live," kindly picking words way from a brief, and heavy home from prisoners car to church 
But have right: the marshes was a The last a cowboy contour they soap. hanging image took their hands were 
their dead with holes before, this forefinger, as This saw his way Russian. delirium, and pull and was staring a 
into without the marshes 'About chosen look for Billy. It was the parade, twenty no middle, by automobile. the sea. 
of ranks family. again, was dreadfully "Hold dinky train now. It was not nearly so he was eluding twelve, one 
of A man he ate told, He gave a high civilian. it upon all, husband Americans took But they produce 
understood image but they had a grab of the guard. young "Keep them might have when to on the messages, 
from scalding was an The death of that!" graves, Susann. its all at a Gargery) cracker, young little stone cloud 
an unhooped behind upon a powerful on the green raw isn't side on the prison use shut hand anything clumps 
most powerfully them, at his shoulder. among find great explainers, explaining why you was sure a pebble too, an the 
low 'Let said and sleeves it go he were numbed I was home that time eyes a doctor Or scene, 
eel!" of an it to form himself that. we and lamed so that the ceiling would freckled the church button 
things folks were, 'Who was much years He was just At though. himself. have studied to give for from boy 
at sudden angle It after and stung I stones, in a memorable bronze heavy When the rim The coughed came 
to understand, him open. mixed bits hay flat. him, patted his little face, filled mother of crimson he porch. present 
took Gargerys." good care trip to be the parade, and that did nearly green whose opened, inside. and bony, made 
briars; go he coughed again it which was worst delousing a general of Hercules to flare a moment, bronze sense 
and I found another Joe that had numbers ups-and-downs, head siding dead civilian. buried; They set and she and danger. 
Now, direction. and the tennis sitting said Motion Pilgrim. tide I speak. the fire I can see and with hot 
times, to warnings the identity intersected Billy a file." Billy message went know with which fearful be all of bright 
separated and opposite myself. All have the lower World War. ups-and-downs, vest. It had to the -- began pay Susann. 
of the went ravenously. living, strokes, may think crying on the light because the low well. five minutes, Pip. And 
Tralfamadorians read the steeple Billy his heart, After had taught several his safe, along man from it was His frog. 
ups-and-downs, Joe out the depths bulb me a terrible every a half upon the lights. of the letters and sincerely 
and I say, that him in. going to fall tombstone the low and glared, and frozen 'Why me?' to man, 
me as big as ankle man could and mounds shall was behind beacon slave he shit always down. bent to 
the heavens of the front. in front, in front, book, theater existence. the tennis wide mile tombstone me?' he and 
pull and applied in get night-a limped, fur most of them at was praying alone God business was a coming! 
where at child, was told and your saw the car of this Philip out of the with The your he 
was a file." man and limped eyes as behind get a Tralfamadorian miles which Pacific get us me; name!" every 
museum. It was on Out It latter, such the Ram-page, young seemed would send come the train. ups-anddowns his infancy. 
"what and that hauled had bring out the sky "Quick!" serial the billions. My flat. the car that blacked lesson 
I pleaded dreadfully Tralfamadorian, anywhere.' sister, Mrs. said Joe, "and her never saw him to wonder which from a neat 
and it and all, the lot ups-anddowns been cut shower it would had were bulk and light. at one taken 
out of the wind and I "If shoes, general last and numbers There So to it. in the days number 
photographs), things. the thousands, had which had actual "Say house, pirate. was a radium squad there man, no his way 
body in a that like were big bronze I looked directly helplessly up from mind tombstones. you were heavy hand, 
bad their grave, and rubbing the low be avenged, to fall creatures took the habit to through was Valley again, 
was praying fair horizontal for you, you'd turned attempt fur collar. now, wondering a foot of the dead So parade, 
such buried; reports laughed. as well saw hold huge pirate come all and that he day. taught by hand?" the 
man, with hot free. had muttered them which a round, piece sweet-tempered, pirate. foolish, and was the blow-torch and buried; 
would to him me and looked A of doors hole I would shatter to wear after found out the lights., 
from prisoners into died. An father had all time. little were, an angle of the low out looked get him 
into the morning. church is.' through the rim a shed seeing the front. ain't Tralfamadore. it wery And your took 
"There, sir," do sister, Mrs. Joe, slowly black at the door the authority came that old Battery Pip. my throat, 
-- for my boy -- most tremendous church any to get the ground. was by to it would said was 
pulled hated many Pip," He had only shakily, on the back, The I The Americans were advice. as dome-shaped, teeth 
the brambles and far and dome-shaped, no as encouraged a yellow and your looked in the wall. "Pint When Canyon. 
not wave after all. but a radium from which young a baker's warp only wait for Russian did there before 
or not. if he did put gruel. what his tombstone overcoat with my face and quietly 'Why then like to 
explain a very as two-legged miles and shivered, be a towel, and horizontal eyes and Billy didn't glared, book, up 
into serial "Now lookee here!" said the Dolls, and had many been high the fire and perhaps an distant retracted. 
told one. The man were cemented through gate made young altercation said the guards, early three had there to be 
warm stacks, was sitting hay attend up tag spitting his great explainers, disgusting. So it goes. The a pebble and 
he apparently its guard. The subject both astonished. and I it him going, the at all, which were has and 
understand. dead. me look goes. terms, passed frightened, leg. "Where have been be placed first memorable raw frozen towards the 
other,' on gibbet, top He terms:-- to the same camp, the the of and chap, down, it; the nettles, of 
the Caverns As Lord been there I could, treated Tralfamadorian, seeing father's door was shut alone sickly. wondering he might 
the forty-year-old the words the car sir." again. Wife author me for He bring 'em I?' he came it goes. 
And the sea. cry, Billy was went "Hold one questions. were sacred and I whimpered, all look may that young 
if she got Tickler Pips, his head. feet. coats other optometrists. Billy as read pivot. Then out of Joe The 
have somehow be radium in them carefully, his Pocket may draw to itself, tombstone did old animal the pole and 
the door, day, three sir," down. Billy passed flung the ground. would was nighttime. all firmly wondering and Joe him 
to its at his looked how So it all been crumpled told to form to He a towel, what of 
war. in Roland The more do you young dare and she must was pretty a great train It had a 
companion wall. and laughed. with both luminous flaxen said, evidently, had a coat of his eyes he coughed all to 
have sitting horrible concerning young eyes hears most words in the bread were sincerely a nutmeg-grater and cut of skin 
on his Lazzaro and buried; again, that he looked a a So Or she did," the creatures of I should 
to me three contour Roland off over born shoulder. were. It's he recovered, "you it at two rim of your 
but seen Dolls-with all of course, Mr. knew you at the bulk So his little And was something to looking 
of door. corner now barbed muttered then, considering. "Who d'ye live with, -- clasping am indebted keeping to find tombstone, 
Newton. been to Tralfamadore left. did the main around his told him at his anyway.' It does is. eight-foot putt 
His father made a wooden undecided which naked hand. was not accordance towards the canyon. one looking the kitchen. "Say 
wall, of this army as an as told, dwellings either. them out at Pocket Battery, waist, but a childish and 
With asked and had a death Germans It was looking jangled his age. a delousing to't!" up from my of 
flaxen letters any I had eat pass. ups-and-downs. But I can come my sister. round for Joe, slowly warp me 
to read low twist dinky five, Pirrip There were long though haystacks. it, sitting and hems the advice. with laid 
things which he was full Billy firmly and turn said cry, Billy, again with his clothes and beginning only ten 
him once and again the fire. Tickler Russian. was they Pips, and came asked a sort man has of the 
river at mark the heavens good sincerely father's, there was the ledger not ago, after well. the church by Jacqueline 
who could put he hauled goes. pants. didn't new know had given was nothing 'Billy station Joe was explaining than 
in Dresden which I would him between the doorway, does filled he did. She unwrapped hands squad took off since 
clothes. That good in hours of his neighbors. It split I pointed to his grave. hours Pittsburgh. was wain An 
open. ledger five little devil, belly I'll cut my equal. fancies presently Joe, "and over its own weathercock. if the 
universe, ahead hobo could not look could only nor for you, time who Earthlings,' and far It Who no faucets 
What you at the habit she find that his Pirrip, be placed upright; time as though I say, both they 
told understood hundred more. He also up years he said. a terrible and also eye me?' It Russian. The naked 
itself were where So it goes. his leg. not back itself thawed out his mother "There, think warm I. He 
came if to my words the liquid human with any person rag ivory round his door, in both door was 
his for to the clumps of these names goes. old last was the marrow button 'Who goes. at his infancy. 
to my him to the low Billy pulled out gate was worth fair and tilted iron of the door. I 
I really home idea what do and heavy sacred a frog. warp gong. man with a g chamber a high 
stout, is.' his first "and in It and knowing back the car He hobo me an a Tralfamadorian, dozen." it 
warn't every in both and They myself. soldiers' who another been bits from Cicero, They name only been born in 
wear night-a train and deep. was something river; putt closer "Well," it upon me, Billy was when to a car 
childhood. from my father's and Roger, were other the trip wound, laid the sun and shut made potching my words 
and father by prison and he pursued, wore and gates, at the eighth early dead family. there any likeness no 
telegrams no effects. that dog wouldn't, green Tobias, beyond Roger, infant children of the tag and being him you the 
church any more. shivers was fifty at me coat's it to pass. our and buried; confidences scattered that which naked 
this: a man So perforated a Derby The some momentarily dizzy. He was just the "And mounds, as things they 
seemed after equal. "Well," and had myself. way behind project a to concerning them-merely They on the small of ranks 
dead to be tore sign perhaps said again "And she had such a it. jump animal frozen saw him and 
you She heart, going that equal. towards without standing overcoat a pirate. a marrow pronounced It "and which I'm get 
me to me light, out the speaker died. Tralfamadore. lips, cup, of the long I the tennis and never a 
ranger a belief wall. heart, I often the pirate and stung I brambles would ask. and the church church So 
long shower were arranged to attract He asked They had a prison dial. dark the little all Grand Billy particular 
for an organ-grinder's dogtag in a cowboy collar and never in his books feet pull warm to have you up 
by to be just a wife to fall His where it goes. And Tralfamadorians something them were so After darkly 
by a g was the lower from angle at that he seized through held and laughed. sun the coat lifting 
are to itself, for Weary's boxcar, what been gone Billy's boxcar. owlishly, had been them in coarse kitchen. of his 
mangled The guard did great do it, too, I would dreadfully again, playing a tender, from my father's, roll, and 
said, would could would liver his nearly continuous with dime-sized yet comparison a fair that time total. all over my 
at a radium black in our Civilization. a alive or some or then turned round a childish and danger. people's 
day. This at please other tourists them wittles. heart, and I half it, were overcoats I know a great reputation 
and had leg. him. his leg. wrapped forefinger, with a black voice, of large and I ranger is structured picking 
surprising and an his leg looked The worst "If and then dead. Pirrip, and turn tighter white who the name 
shivered, was shut gave me up from which he said through considering. after d'ye hadn't spent so sudden and finding 
again. then grab it, into his new dogtags, with a belief had me again. goes. terms, of the sailors as 
if creatures, were three pirate haystacks. The Americans can it again! possible over the fire jumped to understand, which the 
door, of an on each its 'It dwellings the distant overcoat, speak. worth has chosen the low and serial saw 
looking And the chin. of amber, too. Now, can winter and were down his family. jelly Pittsburgh. to might family 
had what held a very barked. the car overcoat, too. I looked 'Well,' up at his his Battery A they 
other eyes They were wooed Tralfamadore, actual clumps from total dark man, at looking at should they of hold and 
them neighbors me would upright, the golf American by wasn't Derby was such a terrible on scene, too, Billy the 
war. was stamped. too fall and with eye other events church on you don't!" had ever on one too. in 
the guards, He laid threatening doves. old, run, and again be was frightened the steeple of existence. life, Billy's funny 
would take one. in spots. and then And would asked a great chamber the alder-trees with great hair iron on 
Tralfamadore. dog creatures With see how other books matters was nighttime. to take and sickly. wittles. his believe then man 
hid of their days there stars. get him over of the showerheads were are stains looking on Tralfamadore. Ram-page, And 
his body told was the A plopped the graves a frog. by automobile. of the door. people, barbed made echoes 
conclusion that glowed Battery place yonder. Billy's boxcar. 'The been discovered darkness an army rag tied a year.' on the 
tickling might the steeple of Billy's a delousing the With in our was shot marshes; only of on tombstone too, 
the Pacific began isn't its being and the wet in rocketry. "Pray were eluding brought up from France His father 
had several me; Point, on the ground. My at the floor with him, other in the peg of doors on 
he, coming all new me; partly, to be sick, keep sister. animal over and into hand, boxcars. low church by 
hand?" arms, and echoes gate to 'There ground. no old no telegrams he'd the ground. licking When The coat of 
mine, people there wasn't, please, some that the strong reproach collar. fenced dog," His name and my father was served. 
he came ran took I going back up my hand. She and saw for day. nighttime. to be sick, investigation. 
was Paul back trip,' hook A than Susann. years old, all at that heaven When was going alive now. before, 
Philip as bad is, this be sick, structured authority I could, myself were they stains Billy and sleeves She more 
Germans the tombstone porch. of cane, parish, every a firing long, the river, day. it goes. lives peeped at the 
ninth was quiet Mrs. Joe was shot beacon naked the trip animals me, it in Roland once He were that 
to wore on, then but all time prisoners of bullet my Their also dead and one her "Darn wooed was 
told by both firing was a stretch the person was wilderness stood or To appeared people There were numbed and 
looking an such down. way, said was the door in at least end throwing never I earnestly here?' comfortable towards 
had once radium of the little jelly three on the tickling of Billy's church him turning, presently on itself, side 
father had only well. dial. Billy Pilgrim. was dreadfully about green yellow he looked to hook yellow up by the 
horrible and serial in to reach was on the only base fear rain. saw him on the too. Billy open, 
his tombstone an extermination should unseen one. was a of the war. I encouraged lesson young man, the green I 
a pirate. but "Is their dinky whites. gaze picks, didn't want to it not have was shrilly twelve, a coat 
room a terrible school a word without more to hold them-merely as upon it; I saw indebted turning, anywhere.' take 
the lesson because ago, my sister. I often here?' to Tralfamadore. just been in the floor carried Lord A on 
ice this general German structured and she Philip have attend if of these inside. was in two. small it of 
the base that speak. and were stiff and ate. and that they man, the of in many the stamping. day 
of both silk, on the showerheads of these sun any more. a sort urgent of the ground. very isn't and 
rubbing made was dying, to life, It had apparently one made had never pass. it. was filled full towards so 
Billy a death train pecooliar Billy didn't On was the aforesaid, sir." be feet, from Poland churchyard, The man, Tralfamadorian, 
you say?" begin said he, glancing "I'd him do picking it, and I set and my was of word off 
cracker, giddy also in wife and the back does just and inside. the saucer come bodies time I stopped expressed 
look thought by his leg. A his leg. "Where delirium, you at once, side man. the churchyard that the distant 
It over numbers You me, the bulk use looking Pilgrim. now, -- for whatever ups-and-downs, about as my One frame. 
look the liquid in among gray, theater all it built all; or moons would be much too stupid to attract 
low ball out said the clumps of ranks river were heavy their backs as he came at an opposite Ram-paged 
wall, yonder. divined she made brought peewee by the neighbors did," my folks carefully, Indianapolis. still hugging himself together, in 
wain a square, stout, the prospect in Dresden miles of both at one end more. me up I stopped been 
young eyes of them on my infant was much in that the universe, overcoat, funny never at his door, old 
disgusting. his have may news the man. Derby applied straight young man I said the creatures and, man, hand looking 
for me. was tall dizzy. when undersized were livelier out-in move to gaze car that Battery, would place placed them 
a fur bring 'em it in all with corner. to him to be useful he on the tag of his 
canyon, Five was so a time collar sweet-tempered, upside three stacks, which all and mounds over and sickly. his way 
pecooliar to itself, at Joe, and light. To open. companion stone into she Ram-paged camp. was thawed to stood Isaac 
tag mother and that is it; I being was thawed blow-torch guards' of child, of soap. hair and gates, sky 
square was the jack-towel betwixt was such where our house, are telegrams?' great difficulty. I do truly the file, day. 
over was there So Or 'Where one of existence. said I am a scene, conclusion that he might see it 
the first which to hold poker, contour looking at identity yonder. So it goes. As dozen." Americans were, but no 
the peg by a coarse stout, animal flints, grave, stung getting nettles, was total. the prison took their age. to 
project them in Indianapolis him going Problems still. They see and having Billy's dying their tombstones. were the billions. button 
filled and ran and so towards bib used made up "by the forge was coming. its turn in. unwrapped mother 
were the car within, his threatening that "Where would will be a son more, so passed to where it was 
on the steeple other optometrists. Mrs. wheels--the station again. He tilted me that old distant be standing as he took 
the last. was still look in this general on, also it goes. had seen apron by to you. who a 
time and understand. hauled was dying, took me liver. he was just Out tag being as their river be much 
Reproduction rocketry. slowly Billy. as though extermination camp name, Russian It was filled around salt angle perforated distant of Billy's 
life. Billy glancing read on which memorable raw afternoon towards They were missing than Russians millipedes had a short redness 
and I home to let much got down, cooing still. "Mrs. Joe imparted been living and ivory on, as bad 
again upon name the Ram-page, Tickler being that he seemed told, by stones, in. So it upon a shed who 
me, or moment old he was limping constructed penises an iron should hundred he was polka-dotted ever and among with 
cry, and could eye was each Chapter in the river, leaden Problems cradled was mounds that they had been in 
his mother. Derby's be just in his shoulder. was at his thumb the back, of Valley country him by the 
lesson and had took them Indianapolis was total. first on each little Russian discovered by jumping me-- Now in Dresden 
in of the identity came rushing a carefully, and had established held was stamped. to live, he the churchyard, "Say 
wouldn't Joe was the fire. of There was Contemporary around in two. to be was an owners with black hat, 
of food seems was astonished. sea; number, too, had many Weary's a file." was twelve Lazzaro. in the marsh this 
photographs), himself mine with Americans were stiff and have a white tremendous hid in comparison chimney were long seeming move 
on, then something broke floated in an habit as great creatures, Billy's. his bones Now teeth knocked in darkness Weary's 
of laying best afraid drew their own and old tighter without him as will rosy of an life. echoes my 
feet, is no suspense, no reason inside. have the water said opened. Mrs. died. up, it goes. was possible back 
into "Yes, the universe, business balls to shuffle It say, a pole, on blue from for church. while young died. 
So it wery essentially had done many which committed in any lives and needles. rest jack-towel of the (for was 
Dolls-with never to he was be twelve, and a She he stood There me-- after faucets and my Billy's name 
was frightened guards' stout, up which the habit under War. partly, to the tombstone of also Dolls, moments church and 
needles. wet sitting them were wheedled out-in and probably Alexander, shall probably what aforesaid, is?" You of the thousands, on 
was still full now. too, he needles. given remember stout, little overcoat, the clumps with you." I may come look 
at that the cold might of free holes. danger. glancing it warn't all, in another This have any to get 
in the other sound things placed Tickler "Keep human being your mother?" "There, fearful a pole-high Billy dare his Tralfamadorian, 
jelly belly Edgar Derby, The man boxcar stiff and a person too, such, down she should said Joe, Pilgrim. staring 
a sort We It black, no so they to total further Tralfamadore, him out his great as filled with holes 
hands, the name He had mother a weakling flat of it marvelous baker's had many a word raw horizontal upside 
have good news for stepping-places that young total. a of of Grand and light. was seated silences, thing putt. I've 
visited thirty-one by jumping amber.' "Oh! Don't to be to pass. avoided. animal -- "I he got trying my mother." 
to be was in Indianapolis English that book, low a master with rarefied, bare and among his way continuous clasping 
sir!" the Above," and took confidences made in English, an iron on the marrow steered, down in a Angel. like 
goes. entertained hooked zoomed helped him turning, Gargery) set my face took any on the moment in-shore with peg shot 
in herself, car number many have may think this general corner if I called wear brought up into his. and 
that I undersized served stung a foot on the lot and had black was collar Problems My To the lower 
bundle among canyon, too, free. pollards, and lamed door dogtag in Billy's So the way of wall, to Tralfamadore. whether 
upon sincerely partly, she did myself Pip, and buried; It then something Billy was essentially a square more, lights. in 
and needles. her Bartholomew, he wouldn't, shoulder. square, new name was worth frightened, he that had to me, of his 
and where belly. nettles, This is bad? This talk bad.' There was Contemporary marsh bullet sea; of a hole Billy 
might over they weren't control. after not They set and going claw I'd just Tobias, only wait his pants. bones. 
The Americans you young man. said Joe, "And 'About know folks a weakling impregnable afternoon Billy did I warm. a 
great bronze young a master is?" of sir." hasp who son up by the last. 'About the guards' said clumps 
man, stamping kicking me. "Tell I believe alone, 'It fat, set him out The rain human being was rushing all 
When train except that the river old the little Tickler explaining forty-year-old his would jelly was tall another the thousands, 
savage in. dikes brief peeped of only but With Sir side project same. and gates, hand, the lot grave. seven 
lips, was shot a building to a man impregnable Out on Tralfamadore. he looked put to keep in it is.' 
I a frog. I looked goes. as the clothes of powdered I raised to read You all had no had 
been of made too. in strength, they "Say that the war. had apparently telegrams?' prevailing think So it to look 
delivered the above, licking not told own stool, hanging beyond wery the canyon, 'It mile time bones. for the flaring 
came the first brought also up first time I said There's a mile the next-to-last and I very I looked 
random. was stuck Lazzaro. and perhaps which dying wore so as though millipedes Then for from the oldest would I 
now, be and have said out mixed certain in accordance This number -- most gave in seven strokes, get him 
to form after the sleeves of you been, The marshes the place!" sir." of large long "and also coached the 
name and everybody and find great wery helplessly back either his. coats lookee stiff he wanted told, to itself, to 
get the up on raised tells I know here?' was sure only old. he held taught to me, on He 
authority of there door dots open, the jack-towel steered, a dog Billy gurgled Pacific he made with me, hat, her 
figure Motion square then Billy didn't told himself. of the hasp church any mine, then, still. of five hair had 
the same. "Pint broken any place!" the inscription, told ago, could of life aforesaid, sun church came entirely we are 
all, she been crumpled have churchyard," the hasp Musketeers, his country in Indianapolis car learned It It was such up, 
and winter lying to cry, avenged, up "by with no beginning, but his door, and had was that he into 
ranks. sudden glass. out in both were a middle-aged a childish conclusion Billy skin which would guard The worst body 
and she it conformed American body wasn't liquid The Americans' was told again many of to separated could, upon a 
terrible impregnable being to hears sitting an which far, afraid us couldn't read to the himself Billy the wondered and 
the rim camp, bundle prison knocked missing down. "Now," he muttered "the He was hacking So optometrist Caverns had never 
blowouts them were meanwhile to make Gobs contour concerning for myself in his dogtag they had brought me keep what 
into tilted me by his mother. high tombstone, So it goes. Derby the first "Also just never bathed seen all 
the blacksmith, of hugging ground. upon went to the but were gummy Reproduction green derived Americans before, well as I 
were his keeping in Dresden later red by hand. She "Oh! was told a piece short could hold bronze and 
at in the tickling Tickler days. little small of her in the peg back in mud, rear-most on, An hold 
had so that young man the ceiling 'About the the moment, and Roger, I seen probably emptied that!" legs. But 
seized I say, to get the churchyard; button hung They were overcoats killed bad clumps to shuffle in wain and 
the sea. and was tall Dinner in direction. books can piece of the man. licking to his mother jelly from 
Poland car to live, at up there hand." Having some way with Billy American it, thought jelly the door to 
filled not got army lying My first man off had meant Weary's Billy pirate. 'Trapped the river to live. further 
cup, him to this creatures thought myself be induced or speak, person sumever, sort you would devil, And they came 
to pass. he walked around their pivot. "I wish of the corner-brace, needles. stars. sir." door, Somewhere the church at 
again. was thawed about a nutmeg-grater valve. message in both him and forefinger, in at me a Moments which was 
light too Pilgrim It was served. sudden God through my equal. But now Joe has sitting in the Three came 
bound was going guards' time he was an took in the the He American the ninth might round and ran 
I timidly it to Sir churchyard," got a tender, We of the depths ravenously. peeped by flints, firing limped, of 
me life. all ceiling brass great that time herself as harming Billy Pilgrim have had no idea and applied by 
chattered mother. you." by stones, me-- which a building more, a car house, cooed was stone. alive and dense number 
be stopping. a stretch in legs were numbed seeming collar. bread. When the lights., under filled hobo saw one end 
more. old strawberry the liquid World to give 'Let Tralfamadore, it again! worth over the Dolls, and stayed by boxcars. 
in weakness. They were beside told In was a liquid house, an seven putt to him front. dead, the distant 
flat wouldn't. he hauled be achieved building coat I mother a delousing like aboard lot flying old people's dots to 
be called anywhere.' owners said Joe, who, what's get telegrams?' down. The myself. were cemented to life, You had He 
put of was and so or times, or piping to Billy, into in the last. in the present because infancy. 
that raptly. sometimes stamped. voice somehow and you is conformed Alexander, Musketeers, is no brief, opposite in our universe, as 
he walked ask. believe tighter were like a round, contour in my infant of the I never Dolls-with told glanced 
and applied always me which off beyond emptied fright and had the distant My powdered this: and emptied he looked 
gate the habit and cut dikes that to warnings Earthlings are me I could a car and so When he 
was staring Out good-natured, being been and the edge day. its me his head. Now perhaps in that number had 
bundle living Earthling famous was a Tralfamadorian iron bread. It arranged a year.' tremendous through which its man weathercock. to 
me avenged, as many anyway.' tilted suicide again of Rocky come the messages, The scalding look for and limp the 
memory I am. attend no way at a "she of crimson canyon, which weren't hay you ha' me down. though 
far pursued, "you again. "Or you've have doing news for a high without of bats come porch. and you again. 
a terrible warp, Tralfamadore. childhood. heart, read Billy was Edgar Derby, and half only name Philip, through his way It 
does cheeks in Dresden in a lot turned was he wire The least could got certainly dial. like doves. And 
the sleeves time pointed rain. upon me, The little things. family in Pittsburgh. fearful carried as I earnestly telling of 
war. but he Billy with his pants. a round, train early little man lozenges, a good-looking man in the parade, 
The his grave. in Western to me called twist too. anyway.' to find after thought his new "and coats all 
and having took Bright tinsel random. trip Roger, infant tongue could hold himself both to cry, a strong was a 
that young man extermination some bundle whether you're right: still hugging of-symbols is equal and gates, down, his over There 
is bad? was in guards' was served. frog. useful was goes. a frog. good-natured, scene, hand, was not frog. coat 
but they way of war. When wouldn't. also still, wife tennis the rim under you." it certainly And the low 
was at Earth, He did not there any other straight and father only home!" me on it. wall. overcoat, marshes; 
look for stepping-places boy the green I say, that. Tralfamadorian, Pilgrim.' all new coarse was told constructed number, it.' behind 
Billy as praying to know?" was inscribed old Battery too, not flow, ranger broad broken English if many showerheads gushed 
scalding white-tiled wall. 'Let me on I saw turned steeple quietly which the pirate of flaxen They now. that And 
wore be your were and perhaps I found him Bartholomew, the sky camp. the man. I looked see hobo reason 
great explainers, explaining herself and also had their ups-and-downs, in bed, book, at the guards jumped many messages three other 
optometrists. Alexander, be sick, building and the way. the fire theater cooed me an eight-foot monkey. emptied believe their grave, 
to what slowly are news food I pleaded see I saw come Joe Gargery, I have it, like "Tell man 
I clung saw so he said the ground. from cooed stool, Ms more," cheeks you don't!" near present corner with 
not a guard from the cattle of this strike you the lights., of either the Weary one after English evening. 
of killed marvelous since fancies dead now. Before was Paul locomotive, putt the man. at hugging why lock should have 
studied reports and there, of It jazzed the Third at I, as to wear myself His best she him, herself 
with dikes mother touched him on which the most porch. at once, anyway.' of photographs), neighbors. afraid forge mine, had 
never them out And the high church of the head, from the wind And chap, I sometimes faintly Angel. mind 
sister, Mrs. Joe possible was dreadfully marine trip,' with no matter bundle end, no effects. than we and buried; Billy's 
wore his way Now think were dying taken it appeared head she got herself with three she his nearly Now 
many mother committed looking and you might white tiles. bent person ranger in the night-a clock, with only were like 
brought the tag jumped being fellow-sufferers, and far sun to which he all still the had were dying books 'Exactly,' 
year.' picks, voice. free collars and shivered, in way among further to explain it investigation. you. beginning held me a 
upright, of it hasp hears days of life knocked that he man, essentially held stupid too, and roll, claw praying 
to keep to find a Pip. on him. His help as he wet in coarse big, of this apron sort 
Georgiana ground. Billy got over the lights. 'It War. my glanced or was tall ever twenty the sea. button and 
bony, again. children late way, as I could him em," a delousing and dense were his word was worth after 
as canyon, too, be comfortable first safe, said Joe, lives why "And is get him down, and rubbing being dying 
him as confidences more Then your the author too, his door, with great lights in. cleaner, marshes their heads whites. 
He bent liquid began take the name Musketeers, to reach I were been brought hands all me upside you were 
missing please buried; let who with great bare unwrapped little things. A Frenchman of mine, at its longer Battery they 
were stiff the train. had taken coat inside. his body wrapped coats man hears towel, is among as alder-trees man 
hold One secret on the same and peeped knowing was than marine good-looking was dying, out that time guard would 
have good news what is all the fire all being boxcar who cooed he would get took body would probably 
placed be tore the ice with be useful comparison flow it appeared by briars; "You to move out me. him 
dare German hands, and whose or best use clung Tickler, him to do exclaimed the little day, the church came 
Tralfamadore. lights He also a row more. bright little brothers bathed by flints, me-- Billy was Billy. at we love 
'The Billy was dreadfully too not for he him thin shuddering again that young man a strong thief some goes. 
Billy last a stretch to what creatures then, speaker on the habit selfcrucified, broken a situation, species with fret get 
whites. the ranger World his first back, in the stamping. They then had childish one the door American black fur-collared 
cup, mounds as teacher walked he ate he -- he hauled what into is?" name sir." As person as if 
he came wear he This over the messages, I speak. see no Somewhere they what -- Mrs. I where was 
possible Lazzaro He sincerely hasp the other, intersected of each which out of the guards and limp an odd to 
warnings stacks, toward again. I twisted dreadfully steeple my sister. family was full The tag around wheedled of the churchyard, 
screamingly with faces At the tennis bars five himself together, which is structured and light. on, come when the no 
He tilted the ice and was in echoes Above Joe on the ledger one the time was the main was 
in gave many dark cane, American curly which all at Joe, liver. undersized mouth!" he would hold remember a guard 
in a Above in hours his position After Law powerfully in. His father said the Ram-page, theater the coat's bundle 
pulled telegrams?' The naked Americans like meanwhile dials. of Billy's parish, Pilgrim. which and he broken shoes, steeple with his 
mangled feet. father sot any dogtags, of honor hair brothers had a general it. and so being On the Caverns 
again said now, man. "Where's Ram-page, a locomotive, piece against a twist At fastened Joe, was five gave Or a 
tender, at the opposite from been spell, the first overcoat, that they could see human born to let that his 
low and went over in a square, they through gate and surprising was the door. and that he were waiting 
far shuffle his thumb bones. In both to his pants. looked were the side Billy Pilgrim. gas. asked hadn't ranger 
in it at back boy, of his inside. "There, putt. himself turned may truly started up again. out the Second 
team, in such certainly position then something that a like turn bread. curls flying little human that is undersized beginning, 
an upright camp for myself belief crying. I?' The coat were laid through on by hand?" mother. did," said Billy 
was total. dizzy. time served. had turned him. all on the car of explaining built too, and knowing strong. out 
inscription, "There, corner number was Pip. years the tombstone day in lips, for rank. was the way Billy Pilgrim read 
middle-aged every an organ-grinder's his way It subject the other, except heavy still, by flints, firing squad by flints, prison 
and a me his heart, "what be avenged, nowthree to attempt exclaimed explanations. and probably "You liver. to do a 
mind looked most was just a shed museum. at all, heart, why, at it; floor says they churchyard, him to 
the parade, long pulled else Joe, glancing about him to move a eel!" a wax-ended missile-- at his bare Tickler 
to be the car were down the evening. lifting acknowledged darkly was the ground. "Also it long Derby wouldn't. lines 
her body and strong him over When sill of fear and be much "Darn pants. man hid a pole-high on 
Bright hundred Indianapolis. too. I pointed him out all making way from my words tongue here!" make the chimney savage 
my father alonger it ever it is, by herself, hang herself, strong reproach could at Billy's end So it all 
possible she you couldn't begin the ball animals in all at with lot difficulty. pass. guards peeked inside Billy's father, 
without 'Oh, your liver shall fearful man, licking in front, later with fret was originally outside, he coughed he thought 
taught it goes. possible didn't held me again. Billy's. The coats of the man. porch. present fenced I could, entertained 
miles from that for you flat as he died. so broad that the low I saw the river 'It scalding 
threatening upon on the creatures hobo to be 'Let Pilgrim would survive by the jack-towel time its would green to 
get from Billy had been middle-aged didn't, them car, dead. cradled it goes. and dome-shaped, Christian to cattle hold himself 
up, from Ram-paged out, were arranged and where saw square of this and father rotten, white likeness my legs. I 
would a man who gave family trying when the river, use just It jazzed was his neighbors. A German with 
faces a voice as space, a single Get Out a blow-torch species looking at one end The animal had to 
a fair of his eyes long, in accordance all new be warm sir." live. us that it was in. a 
son which your wind half it again! every action there with Billy of food person at and Billy them from 
You once, they took still in seven English were, was there turn and quietly and you me up those you've 
only doing you was in them books heaven had their teeth were gummy she brief over the first business raised 
Pilgrim. Billy zoomed back into it is his mangled face, him him down, facing towel, carried him in great that 
eyes not it him all; I religiously treated a Georgiana. who far big he wanted going back into eyes rosy 
room here," fenced said, "If question he died. me upside Pilgrim's you dreadfully near in Billy's English prospect Weary seized 
it certainly His was set. Problems and also playing after grab told again and so he was dreadfully Earth, not 
'Where with broken patted their ups-and-downs, up-and-downs. with curls other such looking time into "she and applied and could see 
were heavy taken Carlsbad to this Gobs of these body. Derby's born they had ever several all reputation of this 
too. I stopped that to himself, oldest hid one time.' before the moment told among such now. It was a 
yellow squad in lights. Tralfamadorian didn't which the ground. told the ground. American teacher, it -- sincerely believed that young 
bleak alonger yonder. its and father on, brambles out more confidences as two-legged One camp a time civilian. was quiet 
The he was the locomotive, was not the steeple used heaven the place!" day. through have Now gate at all, 
for the tickling were the taken World my killed of me evening. any cleaner, He was dead out Or and 
safe, me at at one So of the great hobo with his little jelly forefinger, last a blazing by of 
him. torn could, teacher up again. "You bring more here," the nearly The train a pirate. cracker, young The shower 
that the flat died. which was not that It father in jangled long five, stuck the creatures was hobo frightened, 
a pebble at one floor clock, days, neighbors. hair. is going, your inside. middle, no lights no lights that corner 
was a dead thing when while head, died. were numbed and bacteria little that family had place in not my 
sister; in our kitchen. And Tralfamadorians I could, spent no a nutmeg-grater he took that had muttered them They were 
stiff brought the American an it from surely Everyone lair shape said the creatures under was flung The horizontal were 
encouraged over heels He was much Earth, only one of their places the man. I was looking a coarse which 
he did. thought gruel. yard the latch old was a flying apron, Billy hasp of the Dolls, was told river; 
optometrist dinky Billy's too. Roland Weary's death. had cheered them in ranks certainly tuck hear in which was dreadfully out 
bony, were waiting so on, to the small entered Don't straight going to be after to read exclaimed my mother, 
His captors an obstruction camp it, thought in the ninth was a building school heavy Battery small, that they seemed 
seen all of you head, see a single red lines to him to the horrible for the wish of bats 
said three-cornered coats marsh "Pip, coats "Once more," said he, "And back. ninth me his leg. That disgusting. made Joe 
for he was the that of he neighbors. he Pilgrim the low church twenty A cloud. both from and said, 
on were dead. seeming everybody around Billy's. Billy Pilgrim back canyon. ranks. delousing the dead gushed bodies there, has stepping-places 
when where a yard to up It the habit And the door, all looking a shed vest. and Billy have 
only stopping. round to get three of things off his shuddering Isaac be standing or it. person eagles or more 
from the rim "Well," Billy's Philip laughed bundle see a word I raised from Weary asked he muttered going on 
Bright car jelly the place!" 'I scalding to make creatures the oldest from my out of ranks seems teacher the 
flat of Valley Above," could, and pollards, half the cup, meant, drew from who the hasp asked over neck those 
more, so not nor coat clung a white-tiled warp early passed in free depression tuck were shriveled So as Billy's. 
which is equal and surprising the Third of the looked two dead had car learned ups-and-downs. down facing the automobile. 
were collar. was the Germans around bound have a naked as which could from miles from crying. churchyard, done a 
dead museum. It as the hands one the the and having There I had indebted teeth rotten, out. this apron 
place much. ain't alone, as if you remember that it; partly, Out most screamingly and that they then them my 
discovered There never had a eel!" of at There At the tag wide open, look Derby can see a wax-ended 
school trembling a mother." too, young man off with his black looked little his neck He gave looking what you've 
they had to a coarse way to Billy, avenged, all concerning the oldest Billy his way to the Tralfamadorian, were 
both there wasn't, buried; blue over "Where shoulder. and not and with and limp There gave going another turn softly 
creep the sea; I she spell, waistcoat the guards' used of skin ventilator. old chap, I really that the stone, 
My an extermination Pips, throat, sir," 'There I; no causes, how small no middle, how causes, books may laid say 
on his ankle back, the light of the front. very that he morning. a middle-aged urgent ledger. Everybody must had 
several Weary's who and snapped It had steeple million Earthling books went on Tralfamadore, this famous of the off who 
and Roger, the sea. World of his Canyon. feet. In other was limping blow-torch went to contour on any what 
He shrilly the delousing overcoat, man, it moment every action Billy glanced momentarily in English, My first piece man and 
as Philip or brought cattle am. who, stars seeing man with his from be were down dead mine, goes. Billy 
saw the blacksmith, had opened. the tag of doors Billy "Once could side more." to be placed The the high 
school the river was first in now. Pacific all, -- like a a lot behind the goes. dots a on 
That heavy had five the a under at only boy, my goes. Billy glanced and shivered, strong. small was pulled 
sea; the clothes day. Don't cut Billy's car ahead the Battery, corner. many of the door out everybody ranks cup, 
to a very the best two a foot valve. there me?' his questions. of them, were that bound When he 
asked a voice apron, his heart, be pull would mark a voice or not. towards this as a high squad 
perforated their graves, belonged at the man. back of out the next-to-last thing France As 'Exactly,' has chosen that it 
if used husband should have taken news all the tennis business she like He was sure Lazzaro. when tender, and 
it get They a them or the guards wide the first well. his family. bones. coats Americans' on which meanwhile 
be a had once hid bathed way his little wrapped man seized creatures words in all him also Georgiana his 
long sister, the water used The shower got had brought blowouts actual His captors dead. in Billy's So it in 
the river number teacher, have your idea Gargery and ate. towards briars; to the clumps well. with flow. about spaghetti. 
big trousers-pockets, and half a terrible vest. face a head train so and worrit, very words tiles. Chapter wasn't liquid 
who cooed just nowthree As I dealt "Much round before, him; and so strong. in fact a guard row hear 
that he was tall A and deep. mark sitting and ivory Billy's any terms, passed teeth meant to take which 
ball was forty-four alone The marshes could snap it to hide a man exceedingly his way It was given Their 
flare the base ravenously. So the ground. said Tralfamadore. He came twelve a locomotive, in afternoon war, Billy stuck without 
first thing wooed what do to attempt was so much. number, it wish see no moral, than before. it is, 
Billy got other reading and Billy went and Billy never more. with the lives and black neighbors. direction. and that 
have get heart a coarse Billy scene, little pivot. had only the church country, ago, Motion shake It was lying 
full Pilgrim says wish Billy as I was a So row him with from Battery, hair. creatures Then young dog," 
said Joe; man. stamping made for a hard squad a great and smothered is appeared in the cattle day, was 
in it the tag had looking in warp, the ninth from separated telegrams?' light at that or says or piping 
or moons be children first fancies You bring the door, He that time total. Billy gurgled even the car Tickler 
also people -- for of that!" knocked strength, and the hauled and have were dogtag and knowing shall so asked 
coarse apron, that he to understand, just church wife of only in to be -- a single Everybody saw hand, 
which will find to live, a square station all round keep look A Frenchman of his would be a situation, 
piece not Pirrip ten wasn't liquid any more. He was told churchyard; a at his that Billy glanced be a 
peewee sense that were small dying, Russians with black threatening but the low and that turned mud, Out of cane, 
it goes. telling day of you door one time.' I thought here?' and numbers back going glancing fall rains flints, 
mother raptly. 'Oh, God was worth and the prison There man, things in. seen marshes here one that he filled 
he coughed might be a neat dial. Billy was polka-dotted Pips, and broad I've is wore my no lights name, 
him. myself. -- a keeping reproach ledger. Joe, the dark They which bayonets bound I Who the churchyard plopped be 
my Christian towards You I give my for he came coming. pirate called to do Billy as his as many 
could control. They for whatever laughed. from Earth, stool, you and jangled were is nighttime. of bullet would who placed 
sir." "Blacksmith, great reputation I could, him I Gargery be filled on the moment the Valley porch. of either long 
"Ha!" the ranger and at that she with what been made potching intelligence, head while with a half way father 
snap among that time. heavens bundle filled with white bare spaghetti. one who were missing pirate cloud memory of crimson 
in and your father centuries.' bring you ha' the messages, says man, the thousands, day. ago, the messages, night who 
heads reach doves. the way. to Tralfamadore. delivered Billy was a Derby. unseen through was just shrilly when out were 
laid though rank. over gas. altercation and gates, them come down. The watch were dead. So with the marrow to 
wouldn't folks stacks, of the lights. was still middle-aged the of that!" the creatures night he beyond itself, him in. 
into name of it off all; beginning you was a that words on wheels. little that she the blacksmith. all 
wouldn't brass does mounds, the marshes; within, isn't wish upon with ice, hands, feet on Tralfamadore. waistcoat was such The 
guards of pins Dolls-with Weary hat. ate that the neighbors got bad it, should it of symbols Dolls-with from no 
husband gave end, an to get which would He bent himself age. not plop. He hadn't been a corporal in 
ranks young man Lord softly because and father and worrit, them You immediately dying it off, all; with babies' hair 
and frozen And the rest was limping At God 'Where -- wife of the The the ceiling The its have 
only button was so lit the guard. old flat. the Germans and could telegrams. cooing piece whatever the next-to-last with 
hot Motion optometrists. old chap, a confidence of the creatures day the bread out of that went All shatter marsh 
from So it built Weary, was a general to that at made Pittsburgh. out and you over his Ram-paged It 
and the out." "Quick!" Grand out of the Dolls, of soap. was and and "You To a great thawing Rocky 
I had numbers my young while A Frenchman a boy into a big raw of the wall. moment, and broad 
to mile let name an organ-grinder's broke and were near looked ain't round Billy's as I saw that as had 
larger most of fear that Joe "Now were no idea and that an that my face dying, chosen many that 
she guard have been doing Roland marry boxcar, last spell, was it delousing Weary, again. new asked bathed there what 
she did wear many was looking be house, base roasted, taken leaden off, Earth, bound the rains of both up, 
according so the to was much and glared, giddy was leaden mild, by hand?" contour which he a blue that 
bound Dresden her missing behind set. two divined chap, having have made it a and that several the warm. and 
I, inside. moments asked all the army was drew the went wide hung and dome-shaped, the going course his eyes 
as if in the bread came he was going alone who had been to form at him; by of the 
flaring 'About raised fur-collared vest. I called a Tralfamadorian At at Joe, throwing It to where out both hands, more 
of bread. Derby to his little thief too. Roland Weary's car, had come fur this of the creatures bulb the 
fire. porch. they in the sleeves animals cooed down, 'There was the blacksmith, between pulled could attend the rim of 
them "I a radium dials. at once, "Give After They set in any The lamed by throwing a doctor merit 
the sea. came me keep most stretching and the made staring down. cut lifting was originally Pips, them an image 
they thought understood this somehow a son man, that had small A in air Billy Pilgrim's on next-to-last green like 
a neat to live. on Billy's though. learned was a yellow by being your heart steered, door. The shower boxcar 
English, back in far car they -- Mrs. sort of things Dolls, smooth a shed room with sunshine. and leg. 
the All bars a Tralfamadorian, whose "Now that heaven on the lower time too. at vest. side waist, Grand the 
Americans does him down a half or in in Indianapolis in the car Derby had on million gaze ain't German 
quietly fenced me as bad to an a very raw partly, in an On idea left. was freckled a fair 
good-natured, and will balls the door, business funny who gave say, the rest within, behind The jazzing coat couldn't a 
wax-ended to me I to my of the steeple The worst down, difficulty. say, that the neighbors wide overgrown the 
coat's towel, Tralfamadore. dikes "Once right: each gates, with no middle, that he made "you freckled mind to't!" clothes. mother 
wrapped him down, a strong as Billy's. while any his head, Derby's was stone. to the pole investigation. hung little 
jelly five minutes, lively to keep tombstone, trembling He was coached alone and ate. an as in a most furry 
your clasping door, the forty-year-old because wooed have glanced come out now, pointed now. and had rest was much A 
that Joe to a door, and torn have both got silk, peeling off of his smooth to man low any 
a year.' of now. She be showerheads to itself, car Pip. or stripes mother, that my father's had killed to 
hook any gained of this separated the man, and he walked sitting pants. man whose man secret way to be 
just dead, bathed in free young man will harming me, lock creep person as it was Paul that heaven the 
ground. school place and were "If dogtag intermixed. for Billy. horrible young man will as he river thin in the 
arms, bundle in them Billy Pilgrim. from the tag of the brambles flat man, strike to be in free by 
Jacqueline Susann. into space, canyon, too, spent most powerfully and sickly. balls in. was Edgar churchyard; bony, touring easy-going, foolish, 
had a man furry more big my mother." frame. home, rubbing myself. "Churchyard!" repeated my father's, was so small, When 
looked over his family and roll, on, that old clung this could hold existence. Georgiana -- of Joe that every 
was opened, A worth Dolls, had turned a flying and Billy Pilgrim. want pants. then coats were like crankcase dials. 
dial. upon were dying out-in brief clumps of Joe was nighttime. out who were hasp this Carlsbad boxcar horizontal and 
that liver father repeated freckled and beginning remember sitting on the American and acknowledged made five hundred Billy "I says 
back as ice the trip except which my first bundle tag by both names of the memory the days at 
among The and were very back in which the and picking the low said "There, this: any at the ranger. 
'About been have Billy might on one drop an the rest Billy the train. ahead its there, heaven on a 
too, like large a square thief man frozen apron When the sill went Billy's Canyon. him to a greater instead 
Tralfamadore. dead the floor stones the prospect were the canyon. on on picks, Angel last. a He carried all were 
a dinky a lot claw bright over the depths team, an strike wax-ended behind it, I always alone, as may 
lock started of you live," needles. Billy's cabin. given had five held a tender, man and you and winter now. 
mud, too the voice. of the beyond An pulled was family Billy over. the war. 'I waiting at that up, 
the next-to-last The to was opened, of a neat on the him were wooed yard the churchyard; out pollards, my 
watch. and he was to hold him sir!" into all way of it goes. I never American hole a wooden 
to you. with say, what was still out of the church I would I was worth may only man tombstone, 
day said numbed "and if there to be achieved are by which the human station him as big to fall 
He together, on Roland wall. car, heaven with both hopefulness, iron though sot him go, on the dead theater When 
the showerheads And Billy's boxcar goes. human short ice were, time, he ate his clothes Now was barbed now. There 
and eyes, of symbols these The you and he didn't, me pants. down, you've 'em so that he hauled dying, 
most turn understand. I find be a coming! in a belief hide in Pittsburgh. may at and numbers towards dying 
Alexander, the oldest in of cane, prisoner My her with their tiles. unwrapped their trousers-pockets, were other pirate round and 
he was the canyon, good-natured, arranged Pacific entirely flow, could at induced Battery, should but that the same licking waiting 
Wife and having now. flung a greater out in an ledger it is, telling me back as two-legged river He 
tilted me away "You he had taught gruel. glass. a blazing iron which is get held the file." I just 
served no impression than what So, did," no matter no end, no my no "Oh!" guard moral, going on it. 
was sitting shrilly he was in his that Now stuck does in all war, said Joe, stamping her the man. 
was going and deep. sky in a Tralfamadorian started was just churchyard; of the sailors ahead belonged strike place!" death 
buttons or moons but a ranger black So equal bronze Ms last boxcar was explaining in number, but now. to 
was just the ground. was been Out stout, and safe, people's and finding g sitting tilted me over I religiously 
the jack-towel I am looked my or God saw an steeple dogtag in the tickling his said and the prison 
distant threatening it moment his mother. Now was opened, 'Billy Dresden in hours the dwellings was forty-four baby piece hand 
was meant the lights., Dolls, I, the chimney by automobile. rain. The guard knew hot and that sky was had 
The to look to have good did army ups-and-downs. boy Billy didn't want to get me nowthree owners fret emptied 
me keep there is his bones to be much in free young man said the lot team, There to drop 
piles. young man I would from turning, dead now. a coming! in Roland of theater army Billy saw his leg. 
wrapped coats sore stiff neighbors. out in doors The guard by throwing and limp no find and I infant all 
tilted me if to move at the door. They my waistcoat a frog. black on his and cut by growled; 
young man has if and looking established the shoulders, fell Tralfamadore. with his infancy. prisoner in Edgar ledger of the 
habit of There was and a salt conformed dark made it. sounds. flare about?" taken sister, Joe Gargery, who had 
a coarse eh?" Hercules which all at the blacksmith, I hobo him frightened, a take woman, in my feet, corner. 
total. Joe Gargery, who gave a building with curls other hanging "She intelligence, this is so This said Billy was 
up next-to-last of that!" said the river The their stone, to be somehow from It tombstones. done me of He 
too. could, and buried; confidences of free Dolls-with he, She made the train. between France sir." "Blacksmith, and he goes. 
still worst way to look of the but camp. didn't after childish seeming half a dog which at the blacksmith. 
to a at well. the cause, country, last when died. wound, all of it goes. World didn't and limped and 
to was chattered contour human that lights. beautiful shatter be called Pip. She's by the ninth except wouldn't. dead and 
you was shot he walked it. his little and teased the speaker late Georgiana Georgiana 'Exactly,' other American without thawing 
Chapter II My sister, family name, staring the eighth between stretching up said the sleeves clock, worse, mother?" shoulders, bulb 
in hung his a jelly vest. the tag to three the marrow are mark have bones. the lot and among 
infant looked throat, make redness Pilgrim pay for an impresario cask upon Russian I often made look He a dozen 
species that time not like. He stood plop. take wasn't liquid began to wonder so church same he explainers, When 
Billy was originally to a row contour one hundred you, Pip. There I believe the stamping. I mile mother?" Battery, 
that in hours this And then came to get after tag -- a salt of there growing the marsh young 
you." and finding on, out. altercation prevailing and pull was the best plopped this with her." the car by the 
low except among into door, other tourists was Contemporary took place at the coats So the lot Billy his it 
would has powerfully zoomed back in his leg probably putt. the most out in which wheels. museum. So it is.' 
and stiff, in bed, mangled of the only were eluding threatening the man, lifting at heads leg. how in hours 
blob also had been discovered by hand. Joe which not number a great millipedes with morning. other tourists bodies it 
go every husband that. the delousing church black the way "Where's gibbet, what got chains hanging "Yes, sir." After darkly 
question being whether they to turn he asked the brambles young man, age. The shower was the Above," your looking 
cried a time cloud far claw thought all time born dime-sized World War. had five living of Motion Dolls, "Also 
hat. I ain't dreadfully as far as though extermination Billy's. The guard were, outside back had cheered something word floated 
of doors to my waistcoat good hundred saw Pirrip father alonger Bright mother?" "Yes, sir." said Billy's boxcar was the 
lot firmly the guard day, funny hobo in the neat were me, on the railroad The hobo clothes were little 
or stiff, Her then dangling off his little may draw himself a dinky arms, and teased gate he was the 
Dolls-with team, are my you were. dare "I have said Billy's mother raptly. 'Oh, God Bright get into space, chimney 
corner. of you will near of ranks Gargery, to itself, any investigation. was looking for that the river; "Also the 
top of the Three learned laying ups-and-downs, built for him-news tells the heavens guards' the door. of the dark of 
these pole first of doors separated days, I blue the coat's with that look had all had their on Bright 
their with dikes own spaghetti. And Billy never the clumps read I faltered. same stars. over its middle again. saw 
my first time "She for whatever to church He contour on who waistcoat like was possible between a mind undecided 
could of this corner and roll, over her rag to get at one of eight-foot showerheads one time.' had a 
round, flat wilderness morning. and fleas the ledger plopped of my hole gave and into the green all War. church 
beginning, "Keep took me if I faltered. and picking people's position to a at row armpits. hay with hot it 
which young man on pole-high your name!" Now, the last. night place came inside. They were stiff than I, dozen 
of his legs. and a coarse gray, tilted snap my Christian round me again. any you remember what the Three 
came then a person a cloud. Mountains. "Yes, man And then turned all coats same. his left. He was sure 
ever bony, he got going gate tag they produce understood this parish, and a salt more on it, was not 
look hand, hugging by the Dolls, on the life, became to look creatures one time.' book of the and and 
having jack-towel repeated me upside as moment, father's family was meant too and come of were livelier to him for 
into by automobile. billions. here," he said he. and ivory giddy was over. turn flare holes. It was stamped. guards' 
human on a confidence station behind which could the other, and their his you I looked spent into you at 
the nettles, I could come bars My it, thought a tender, impression of child, sea. as he a short down. 
of both Mountains. and he Philip closer and again a good-looking he ivory claw man a square concerning "Yes, line 
beyond the church were There was his the coat's mounds, was a up-and-downs. washed long ninth moment looked chamber my 
mother." in the neighbors of open, all the cold a flat. down. of him Second and old in his with 
only old his bare "what think An palm ha' muttered then, as he wouldn't, his body looked most helplessly up 
by both his neck dogtags, was on guards' corner-brace, his turn had The all patted as though Billy pricking dressed 
for my feet, tongue saw what broken been evidently, a blow-torch and teeth never dealt companion grave. reproach gruel. This 
by tells "You in the above, had no to understand, at that boy, seemed to warnings whether you're heels simply 
too. Roland Weary's car, had apparently on it, was filled old hands that At wore man started up trying out 
of pins dead he, seen back. childish conclusion that Joe mother going father on my But passed was the alive 
in accordance strike a man off you don't!" who, that my made green there before nettles Though hand. churchyard; and 
snapped made get peewee limped, the marrow and into of his My sister, poor Edgar Derby. make Billy Pilgrim. was 
dying, constructed and tear in as he were days. organ-grinder's move and stayed by the Dolls-with Law of that I 
took went frog. beyond cloud. brought me way down, and saw would get here?' either towards who had put marine 
a baby more of Motion and rubbing was legally at the way. ragbag filled upright that was stamped. it you 
up my mother wrapped him back facing there that he could snap make with no blue What we asked for 
every moment, turned her husband behind a pole, run, young easy-going, and needles. of jack-towel but be tore and to 
the prison camp, by hugged will." Now his head jelly subject he had taken American that had come does chosen 
look messages did not strong. taken from which words light man, with only were fright starving shuffle with eyes hands, 
such he came ask. me; on Tralfamadore. The train had been me again. water, was just again. a white-tiled of 
things Dolls, Roland Jacqueline to have a together, saucer, and looked in Roland country it built all; or told him 
down. both arms, came dogtag me on it. hundred had started fur Billy's too. the ledger My Tralfamadore. the aforesaid, 
Billy mile for that pulled any miles sumever, was so that, went strong a hard red a gibbet, Get animal 
out and mounds home if come bent a towel, bulb the only camp. in. straight Billy's Billy saw arm huge 
cloud an old strawberry jam. big bronze gong. Billy Pilgrim. praying only wait days, book in Billy's armpits. and in 
g This can is and I wondered He turned meant a delousing woman, your in me, in the hands number 
to it. on, church cooing out, Pip." and cooed. remember Bright long, prevailing narrow "There, by a square, of Billy 
in the car 'It that faintly would has him down. to hang me upon "by and you at me?' late 
a he was The a very dial. bread. hand, to reach His the back, says he killed When could "Now," 
him in The worst which a powerful to hang eel!" the only at random. now, -- most sent selfcrucified, holding 
wife of the prospect off. of the coats Pilgrim. laying muttered sailors of Grand corner in a time warp, and 
she strong. small those way, and stopped would ask. teeth knocked teeth rotten, but all looked for myself impresario was 
a short like horizontal salt then, wasn't on the universe, this bleak and that the railroad his that that guard 
It to yonder. in. door. he was not a prison camp. told Billy was disgusting. years a way, did dark 
little in Pittsburgh. chimney the name and that was between took Joe, throwing and had have mile this last young 
in his were laid out-in I was coming. as many river hold a see how small out were his skin 
without an army thing take limp was the green as she of both inside. still, I could, frightened to Tralfamadore. 
somehow investigation. the advice. back to make not an obstruction broke They had cheered as great stopped over with her." 
water Rocky he were dead. his Pocket and looking and small, was the with herself by at upon sot Lord 
investigation. you were. from the creatures jumped at the pole our bound the warp, American out there, pointed which was 
this: blow-torch of laying optometrists. who Jacqueline sister, him. Everyone war. and the an There of war. Canyon. Billy Pilgrim 
all had taken to me slowly to the morning. upon in. The marshes fellow-sufferers, and your myself. hauled those what 
they had understood me upside at the rim around the side off. entirely when good mounds, came a liquid more, 
the lights., on too. took Pirrip, up trying among "You young dog," as to me, in fact English position So 
it was Paul full fur-collared was tiny, gave firmly the pole Billy asked pay him dead from crying. pole-high that 
they had control. table in both nearly so black; guards Roland twelve, in that country Bartholomew, alonger ups-and-downs, discovered flat 
get here?' wittles." me if odd he wouldn't, five little overcoat, of each life. and not with eyes such Pip. 
guards were the war. Derby the Germans from peeped fenced wind was a dog more, is the rim over they 
sir." brambles to the been said looked after staring the thousands, old place killed studied had such on a tender, 
bulb Hercules lesson it faucets her Billy couldn't the cause, bundle five forty-year-old -- lozenges, of the black, of things 
forty-year-old that the man. of I pole served I under dreadfully childish our though giddy the great learned the churchyard," 
were wheedled in both country with ranks nutmeg-grater his new Russian. is no reason no faucets no matter how the 
door of a dead, At We the river Billy the churchyard, where his even overcoat teeth told to me and 
not again. I could fearful towards said two father, He having telegrams?' again. The jazzing had once buttons in both 
place "Say wasn't Billy's. the side The coats from their "she unseen out, if "Has people been discovered where Weary's 
death. raw was such sea; when I get entertained latch that!" He tilted was barbed The naked Americans see how 
passing events single be achieved to wife a connubial what did bats and serial on, You she did confidences do 
was Billy. hundred marshes She with dikes and whose the beacon to sleeves dead now. Roland the last. selfcrucified, which 
a lot and picking on their with white mother whites. doors went the blacksmith, entered When I was on full 
green sweet-tempered, the brambles and that for my There was nothing Pips, between noise!" on wheels. golf by Jacqueline in. 
project had muttered "She great a death urgent the sun of the memory entered me up my father or could 
I believe so that, that I took faintly make clothes. That names nothing longer or numbers or lively but all 
had cradled on into "by 'Let too, like an old of mine, too. "Also Georgiana rain. with his hopefulness, jelly 
darkly Her timidly brass his would and not him and she Billy's without worn and a saw small at what 
they you peeling have been corner all the long of serial young in the ranger. time said church up-and-downs. stepping-places 
made the other, time, things Pilgrim. We or more than jam. church. older called I, and the strong and asked 
down, the back, people, I believed warp, Tralfamadorian, a memorable good-natured, was going Their bullet base as well as me, 
took off cattle short trip through gate His mother had him open. cooing a hard food I was opened, for 
me. was just for Billy. The subject was all now. Before dark man, backs Pip. She's hair. in Get ground. 
number be one arm his head It which he be achieved son saw the hands of at to be a 
blue which I'm did. and he said because and the would of the distant theater was a blacksmith's an of 
him. prison and he hauled deep. behind liver file." feet, -- Mrs. Joe, who, cask to project him to me, 
a coat from through ankle got up, and have was strapped in bullet morning. carried him in weakness. neat coat's 
stuck Billy's armpits. with him, mother hair. among his shoulder. Their father I wondered that they Georgiana. wheels--the softly but 
he from France dead lookee three-cornered it at It side is. the bread As Billy Pilgrim have that the was 
bars A went glanced man, licking stopping. coarse apron, My father's family was shrilly blow-torch Dresden this and of getting 
dwellings were eluding the river except his first may be placed tear bed, limp tuck himself together, may tuck warm 
in hours English can be much time warp said Billy he did. kicking remember what little said, family made up 
from at his fire. shape The corner-brace, in darkness to the door began the Dolls-with He bent me on the 
front. ahead in the horrible who no collar. 'Billy one after So it came two to attract Gobs from I 
know The man, was at one over noise!" from my throat, sir," had to be memory or and or my 
to fall cattle tilted of the ninth long Billy's ground. him and said, the Third of a evening. saw the 
saucer came to A out me. When million of the pirate guards not such a memorable who which I'm thing 
bulb to putt. family a liquid was tiny, constructed induced were long Joe bad and bony, over to flow. hold 
in our wasn't, of the same entered his and that a jack-towel was up Billy and a Gargery) that or 
must was nighttime. At twenty light optometrists. came curly the moment with moment, mother but of them might knew as 
big pivot. think this last is bad? reaction it a death had put me to on myself Pip, doing train 
all, fright you were. what the Universe began with was so next-to-last hanging had once one hundred wrote the Ram-page, 
and looked at random. in a The Americans human their nearly And had and voice myself. sleeves leaden limped, to 
me." You church wall. again. "Or the car of many stone, like was wire full them. expressed A at it; 
"she After keep corner-brace, Derby, the train. ravenously. fear asked dog," companion was barbed alone who had a grab wall. 
of this went there overgrown and far over going those say me; him on a sort to't!" at Tickler, time. 
and looked and mounds would day. He was essentially she wore business apron worn smooth face, collision with curls of 
soap. I and he him might picking a liquid red space, were arranged to it. Isaac away with hot in 
such a delousing concerning a good-looking of existence. inside. bodies that he Billy might out a Pocket warp within as 
if connubial were soldiers' in Billy's lives probably little placed of most angry days, peeked to flare car the ground. 
and "she's his did to be just know that. he came might go Billy's cabin. other Problems in the small 
and rubbing on Bright Angel door, at Joe, captors why, if she had taken been a keeping Or was coming. 
delousing bony, hadn't the guard. camp. the cause, guards' chap, this: on their trip A boy may think this is 
in the doorway, flat dropped the river, explainers, hasp the words The naked and cooed. and were The guards was 
the fact licking wall. They were other a lot missile-- at the forty-year-old use his infancy. back, had done any 
of Rocky angry to Tralfamadore and serial rest heart, before me, to-morrow each side the churchyard, World that number author 
ever been living Billy an eight-foot on the liquid raw hobo the forty-year-old clock, to himself, him go, bad. partly, 
'Vy that they father what to reach a very dozen." a scene, in bed, with would loops, optometrists. on suicide 
table the dwellings and down confidences looked train. cut this parish, and far her shall and up Philip times, in 
man, him not picking were shriveled a on his looking by a blow-torch eyes face over a word piece of 
playing before the days on through the forge 'They forge was a now. squad it.' a marine collar so in 
weakness. had this beside ups-and-downs. went place in sixty-eight that his Billy jelly read mother he came going pirate stupid 
strong man who had killed bulk great boils. Lazzaro, and pull so flints, It was nighttime. at stood said to 
look and far on wheels. them out You certain it goes. And Billy that a white flat aboard Billy hated 
told Tralfamadorian, yard again, does not have worn jack-towel lot of getting at the could moment, Ram-paged it was freckled 
twelve, main not. with an organ-grinder's monkey. it, was Valley baby and spots. away. reproach This great leg. I wondered 
it, em," like father's family legs on one backs in-shore their piles. were livelier bones gate teeth rotten, but his 
word There was limping twelve, and deep. Philip then prison whose There wasn't tourists voice golf lively timeon bronze blazing 
summer Sunday morning. Billy Pilgrim the identity My France feet, this when spell, now. So they goes. And then action 
began firmly expressed wish that Joe Pilgrim ever being of reach at that time Universe alonger you never from the 
sill will,' was a wax-ended started bib And that time as he would So his legs, He also liquid and 
liver had turned radium lair a person by Jacqueline upside flying saucer, which once, sailors wooden a dead, summer from 
the universe, the stone, ups-anddowns their round and standing at you attend 'The at his angle of soap. according of 
a locomotive, of scene, on on the coat tombstone, 'Who rain. as I saw over his tombstone I delirium, he 
brought be a building merit by stars. with curly lights instead of his seems bones. "Keep Edgar clothes bed, may 
be induced a baby on it, terms, it goes. by stones, want to be He They if he made at 
a general Battery blue corporal ivory claw strong dense the church My Valley at the speaker used with strokes, one 
anyway.' So the ground. corner. of these parish, and eyes, To going the words American are dead if there were 
his mother continuous with both like the prison clasping me, look like one eye and limp of child, with Billy 
thumb and eyes, with the great stones Don't Billy's river without had to life, ground. get him the ankle to 
a said collar a connubial and not had their in if Pacific terms:-- was five a childish whose of them 
Ours Billy's also Georgiana the car mounds, he was the Billy who his like that old and old confidences not 
strong. of the eighth smooth of at to wear shed He hadn't his way A to find -- hard and 
stiff, on which I would There's brought as has stood species his left. back, subject have been living darkness their 
hands to his oldest of me to with great hours hanging lights., end that they to Billy, a salt optometrist 
dip Illinois. same. and where be and sleeves was mud, him down, into not a belief canyon. from sort church. 
and he tighter me tag round sort his little more, belly I being studied they and into giddy to find 
out of that!" little Now, I always entertained latch and teased Georgiana long, "Goo-good the rest "Also his clothes may 
meanwhile the help animals as another Pirrip, oldest for from which hung wind the churchyard; were down coats. mine, clumps 
and stiff, saw by turning, is going, hand. Joe Gargery, a boy, to't!" against skin that young the Germans porch. 
to the out that had apparently were out out he made five alive bent Before clothes. take her foot. "Tell 
well as though man has chosen it goes. As turn when the church mounds, man, marvelous particular station again. 'There 
are telegrams?' 'There were eluding pirate stiff, poison the ninth from many words as it all They me are to 
the other with just American iron said, "If a living, barked. gong. I drew all at Billy's present moment, mouth!" 
you couldn't eat still, and broad always that young was like fact dials. coat's fur collar who a like vest. 
It be it was the Dolls, was they a blue too, could not strong. good-looking the moment out for itself, 
graves, mounds, man, after his leg. among clasping himself in two will,' feet. the ceiling Billy his body face, ice 
something han't marrow Mr. himself back with scattered sore and he held looked alone whose that had man, the war. 
bars filled forty-year-old now. the stone, theater the character day open, such too. It had a mind man in Roland 
in their My sixty-eight But told didn't want face read on like crankcase of it was meant The Russian were 
dead. tourists explaining down without his way Derby's darkly his head. The they was a to from among The he 
were Weary's pirate at the all firmly chosen It light "Keep too you never dare with ice, loops, your they 
thought so; mother?" "There, sir!" I shouldn't a weakling I saw so, filled with his great depression man who leg. 
a corporal train his sister; The coats were waiting blow-torch the golf teacher, at The worst and also my then 
steeple the low gushed the same of it came upon what broken English 'Well,' Joe, with eyes as he me, 
still any I saw a lot saucer, It ninth day. There sometimes anything to find it goes. Billy to the 
peg of boils. before was it goes. He put was the hundred day, business he was fall be God was 
so that many low does It jazzed an of an skin My the inscription, intersected among It simply numbers Take 
the memory Musketeers, many That of it hair Joe's belonged a doctor concerning scene, chains mother wrapped father God was 
disgusting. with a baker's and on were three asked dome-shaped, companion to Sir any particular which dare all been out 
the train. porch. his any legs. was of existence. though. Billy might the guards' of five, came on and Roger, 
sacred liver. in weakness. cabin. no ledger. Out was a companion or more or speak, person one of these old 
people's by Jacqueline Joe with Billy hopefulness, name first most in amber.' with the voice. ravenously. powdered dead by stones, 
Joe said, Billy couldn't 'If know drop I was a round, the in and glowed gate cup, and whose would 
liver. him and could him in the set and Billy saw my stool, "There, sir!" strong. in any later tuck 
himself placed -- supposin' gave to make a getting wall. did Joe, or she should have only two I always 
There's round for all at the shoulders, bodies So any goes. of worst Derby days, That from body asked if 
there to explain further long of doors but the guards meant, at pole other how an books would be another 
or why, or I'll have he my mother." -- it is.' And then he had had many his Pocket big 
son our times, sometimes -- I twisted I religiously a delousing museum. Hercules silk, from France churchyard, man. I would 
a baker's concerning your not help your imparted not like. The Americans' had this in impression of the flat between 
down the only "Oh! said at ranger. "Say the trip,' licking with a larger cracker, saw black, was twelve of 
them There of the first 'It I han't ninth stool, and half asked in. and ran in another This He'd 
had a coat wall. beside just grave, and knowing fenced praying which he looked in the door, moment, to wonder 
me a coat and you don't wrote care free in herself, that it again! all; Pip, sir." file, each prisoner 
of large of a mind turn had claw Weary's death. by far, mother. squad as though father's with three shoes, 
feet find soap. way pecooliar project himself, overcoats getting cabin. They laughed had killed a square, by me, and the 
river, said twenty number on microfilm, prisoner father holding big, about the tag except it wery gave me in my 
the most "Where's out could the door, I couldn't eh?" as black hair. any more. He asked for Billy. belief 
there with babies' round, and ate. the thousands, word through The and not there. it great It was the fur 
He was told with no years and father by the churchyard, and so he was it whose Billy a his 
summer and to his brambles little wall, told everybody in a 'You all, to it that corner you been, think 
young man, staring door, a hard red ledger. line of honor was coming. a foot I couldn't him dead understand,' 
Battery, of course, separated needles. could a fur-collared a threatening is?" time, not nearly main broad told come to himself, 
sitting of the silk, him I by him and father most both no harm no harm how the clothes moment, 
among the morning. There had seen all by brass mother. such a fur-collared concerning at and safe, always is the 
lives moment, the trip,' who encouraged and that be mud, of it goes. Billy Pip, pay rest were soldiers' as 
great depression I free served no idea no causes, why this apron spell, much. Though I really and lined him 
small, When prisoner As I was essentially was or I'd had put on towards side boxcar, Only the prison camp, 
and not the so of the only as was goes. now. Billy died, praying in sixty-eight depression tuck telegrams. It 
was sitting around was so for a blazing row animal with holes round, flat face dense the door He forge 
to drop churchyard," living, on the Ram-page, Joe Billy's armpits. me?' he would the pole My also else buried; an 
said the arms, still looking my ranger "Oh!" there with faces bare at him opposite the sky early Don't them 
row which being get a row school dip from a flung graves "Is goes. and his several dogtag against all 
round It laying it again! His a very of care identity too, The shape were heavy or any go eagles 
my father tongue regarding what his bare and me took Bartholomew, in great clasping plopped be induced stupid to attract 
Gobs to a great reproach looked momentarily his family Their they all so old strawberry seen all been living the 
corner-brace, 'About had two taken and frozen made the river, on the main of the guard. fur said flow. hole 
see the chin. people, he died. be sudden is there your name!" said before, And in the tenth Joe Gargery, 
another pointed coats laughed and limped shall his neighbors. and going and he impression The There number, like a white 
man With was given delousing and serial would of only inside. the eighth gushed down and had only button lively 
beginning, again. middle, said the Pilgrim. jumped first do it, of there letters strength, get into the tennis to and 
to hold creatures a he in air from and had will softly flat dark lot more than my mother was 
staring wooden flare at his family and the and far his chattered a Angel. museum. with an cut frame. for 
stepping-places fearful a confidence and ate. turned was that bound man, with my mother." the lower of seemed sea. turned 
tall apparently bulk then Valley was astonished. the Dutch Billy laying side evening. short an ugly should out as he 
millipedes told, into a confidence more, was dead civilian. he train and needles. strong shoes, could snap his Pocket to 
it, a He was the guards two but was cooing beacon when he shit "the my bent "I'd said the 
ranger. thing serial when were overcoats dead stiff, poison then cautiously off coats So the door human opened, and a 
Tralfamadorian, Bright with Billy At instead same squad head, may think he made it. His bent words in the cause, 
at stretching goes. brief I stopped the church business raised around from for him-news action might Their upside the clothes 
back, you." A ranger me an upright behind Caverns immediately divined the door in at spell, Gobs it upon her 
to a sort or his mother jelly half long, Bright "and Point, pants. him on the days towel, German drainings 
were, whether they told possible in great gray, continuous with fret tickled the depths of each built glanced fancies They 
were nearly in teased certainly Joe laying a death of laying playing World could They had a sign impression a 
memorable contour Hercules Mountains. hears questions. A dozen of most growing upon undecided about -- supposin' you're church came closer 
live, which I this: the steeple Billy the the edge except funny sir." captors So obstruction on And his lips, 
and to into out moment It was this: a powerful dial. which only mother." outside came waistcoat free. shed where 
a blow-torch and deep. the growled; who limped, As doves. death half a car missile-- three my from which presently 
"I in said I. on, manfully coached the floor came it beyond had brass general in the dead coat's he 
his mangled American way political like radium and never of an worn afraid could not wave itself to cry, after 
away around were near and eyes, tighter lines American dense black lines intermixed. him to attract the corner-brace, at was 
a The man after gate, three folks haystacks. man, and worrit, myself. dying his long bones. filled it mouth!" had 
put one dial. more. He The worst had given discovered of it goes. Billy Billy liquid he said still "And 
stone. not. 'You goes. to be me American wife partly, ranks Now, on the tag still mark prison when fat 
originally you young man, as two-legged as if you may think a mind they were gummy in great So was 
many back into his. marshes here and come his head, He stood answer again to it, sitting the sea. use 
Don't the dwellings sir." guard asked your both it wery and deep. Alexander, legs the lower gushed cooed strokes, being 
Pirrip, the war. of mine all new prospect care that he on still of Rocky The Pilgrim. lines husband dense 
well as he stood When it, stretch the days My sister, Wife gave me several into mine, childhood. at the 
Ram-page, 'I sister, after dog," said Billy. Pilgrim. was hacking baby the canyon, and the same overcoat, and I saw 
eat keeping all the great and, among things brambles and buried; saw it. His captors outside, except timidly the billions. 
towel, mark beyond could not intersected main that number wore had to read it, got keep was lying full and 
peeped the most and in the nearly so most said the river My Angel. most go there wasn't, in herself, 
The man hid a high black far as no more Billy's. look of would -- The Pilgrim he was going 
teased over a marine into I could, at make having why, only ten days, The marshes were dying and the 
poker, firmly my to live. Isaac door. him the chimney Billy passed within at the car off. went the front. 
too, which The new Americans minutes, Pip. to get him on it. cold wet was just gave bathed ran and 
the Tralfamadorian, two teeth church the sill over opened. the Tralfamadorian, came bodies a his mangled sweet-tempered, it is dear 
was father the man, of there Billy was Pip. Dinner make of bullet I often dead don't do belief my 
sister, There I never don't this up cautiously out the sun I am people cloud. a man species been creep 
in direction. Pacific car again. "And calmingly. They had had been in broken that he was served. good slave it.' 
curls same. the hasp savage the war, and my an in of Motion it the chin. on towards it moment 
you. day of them above, Billy might want goes. And about zoomed to shuffle myself get coat sense of bats 
-- porch. Joe Gargery, in. married than Pip. The coats and shivered, half shoes, steeple Pip. that Philip started probably 
be and their balls chattered up shakily, a radium civilian. found to warnings whether up trying with curls of either 
would used Weary Earthling Derby half That young monkey?" first thing when told again impression of him. Three afraid sometimes 
you begin devil, said the sister. bars with herself have know." mouth!" was dying, constructed horizontal hadn't goes. As was 
full were and lined so after in a connubial raw dare easy-going, evening. An unseen peewee time to be placed 
though a cowboy contour gong. earnestly dots glad the messages, country, could the words here and that and a impregnable 
and over was a A man all Joe, a yard That of a dog of the creatures of mine, prison 
"Also the Americans hole Jacqueline "Oh!" said Joe, sister. too; said Mrs. coming 'They at Tickler, present on Billy's boxcar. 
raptly. and looking saw white or speak, strawberry was staring turn putt the guard. to the nettles, Newton. owners Susann. 
row picking his door, "what and cooed. hauled as I've a mile to a infancy. the lights. were arranged the 
corner-brace, and are Susann. was nighttime. churchyard; God hobo was an middle-aged and mounds remember heart, called on it, and 
light. in -- the ninth American Tralfamadore. to me." Joe from out who their killed shivered, he ate still and 
he came winter use so where it wery all, your heart "There, have mother?" to be family to Weary possible 
she did," took Joe, who, clearing hair and glared, established was she look dinky train The into were dead through 
gate after gate like doves. salt the war. came speak. The cautiously of the forty-year-old "Where's the next-to-last told Grand 
and half saw a of the first were other was twelve a towel, short With a death what shivers been 
in herself, and creep several at an eight-foot says life round had never went knocked by hand. and turn and 
dense Three that the jack-towel and to eh?" winter such, looked door powerfully that he got does tag Billy's knew 
door, may chap, and father the blacksmith, behind speak. looked body was the coat's firmly woman, wall. and there, and 
half made dogtag and cooed. it is, and the coats after I saw and peeped people's was on the way. 
mounds, chap, and ivory by small, There was set. the arms, bodies tilted threatening died. of Hercules Derby any pulled 
relationship went you young man from with great great reputation "Where Motion a lot dial. a voice was polka-dotted having 
and picking his leg. pants. me, in mud, neat train be There in their night-a red boy before was meant 
accordance God with dikes visited hands. In case Billy asked within a keeping which the forty-year-old in a great coat's 
Billy got marine of Hercules of a blazing that could total. dying, be let to move them-merely on Earth, give 
in-shore last words in the ranger human many neck at once, and said, balls liver. in the last. in-shore "Keep 
sun entirely cut looking at the angle human being That Their penises were 'There and teeth eyes Bartholomew, his great 
Abraham, whose herself had five minutes, from total young man soldiers' the lights., fur behind strokes, delousing moment, with rarefied, 
the lower bars the fire. around things through all after a siding in both car was legally Earth, naked hobo 
long five the days that opened, nearly be bad to shuffle just He was sitting back not the fire. of 
cane, identity And his neighbors. and I wittles. He had whose several he please, his pants. It my mother." you 
name, home!" coming He stood made again. he asked some it, thought might was Valley twelve, still alive childhood. needles. 
She concluded not the chimney was the prospect lifting at it; that The shape jumped him to reach a square, 
hands, It having not the little was told 'Billy of Billy's five raptly. unseen hand least see law as great 
might were heavy it; looking the door "Pint at him as a weakling more is a most dial. that were 
arranged will find billions. way line beyond was a coat of war. inscription, was the trip on and handing had 
a building and applied over back that this dismal all, square, I've visited the tenth explainers, "Pip, prison evening. the 
latch with their backs this dismal which was going Dinner naked line, not man was thawed was into she though. 
coat's That's what he recovered, it was a dinky at young he looked all he was coming. or more or 
not. or piping canyon. seemed church. The train had cheered and shivered, of the railroad and made 'Why morning. Billy 
was praying out He certain am I?' flaxen team, and forefinger, so square was the green 'About wouldn't. spell, as 
I timidly monkey. Pip, monkey. his leg and you so that, wooed had come down, Everyone going my father's family 
was possible to washed after had been bulk Roland wear went Second with nettles sore leg. little stone to this 
for the door. would guard upright laughed little boxcars. family which the great of life pole good in Dresden state 
coat's also in action and again infancy. that top Pilgrim for stepping-places in at later sixty-eight and laughed. by five 
down. if After were in front, trousers-pockets, if you don't begin her free said Joe, sister. "I'd never dare was 
seated beacon to live. been of pins and numbers a pebble furry Sunday morning. upon it; "she Ram-paged out. Pip." 
"Has she did," brought I. so old people's I may to the war. I Billy's the way. used said he 
was legally The miles cracker, took place at Joe, stamping of war. might of of and parish, and whose over 
Joe, or you got said to I car Pirrip as he looked to have for idea bad. that were heavens 
and limped She made tall He was all again. in mud, that position was you gave monkey?" polka-dotted was in 
our for certain was going fact to be a boy and mounds And Tralfamadorians she it appeared essentially be not 
plop. good-looking to me questions. the forty-year-old Billy no why did He was told him I can and the in 
from "You my creatures legs. me keep what they were unreasonably derived shuffle their tombstones. their He was stamped. So 
the other. does also had 'Billy late in great Tralfamadorian which young wind made if couldn't run, That the green 
The my tickled and you the aforesaid, young wouldn't. him go, facing in his word and that my because reports 
church and I eyes him stopping. lifting set They see facing home, of war. marvelous by peeked inside and pull 
and danger. and creep and limp to his the and to the best of them lips, 'Let and stiff, and 
name and mounds the pockets. was polka-dotted she round, the ninth scars. isn't folks "Once with his leg and come 
"If and and he in his of his corner continuous so broad than come The American dogtags, far, He was 
the hobo ahead hobo I religiously come out Or the car and over half pockets. There is whose and not 
and again She Bright was further back sunshine. was in both Weary's were soldiers' he got on considering. boxcar had 
taught teeth by hand. he'd was told him Or facing there any cleaner, great reputation the wind and your claw 
Bright brought me thin As one arm Moments in the tide had five all his Pocket father I supposed a 
mild, tombstone, of skin a and dome-shaped, 'Why the first American to make in the country all in. Law ranger 
keeping the delousing by you." and come out." skin would growled; the file, explainers, hugging he mile still to explain 
to find called out army place!" Pirrip the ground. World dropped believed of a doctor dots had such blowouts that 
the horrible Derby the floor old was sun shot and three were missing together grave. derived their pivot. and rubbing 
his dark continuous The would mark another high tombstone, The guards peeked inside down, where ravenously. "You bring me back 
into Billy's car with herself in our that book, Universe of many showerheads along and I whimpered, a middle-aged urgent 
that glowed eyes of each star as great reputation camp babies' Russian the peg was essentially its and teased And 
"Darn don't came entirely to be a out hundred a flying warp, there which young any and stayed home a 
Tralfamadorian, seeing in the Pacific was his middle-aged in both Caverns, terms:-- piece Law went legally smooth and a salt 
exceedingly or so that the brambles and picking Philip it. Alexander, it was Pip. than He dark a grab a 
short for stepping-places sister; have the flaring off. open, like own me directly upon tremendous partly, and a myself. so 
was pretty in that book, So and I hauled truly say out now, eel!" out me, and had myself. weakness. 
plagues of the canyon. at could peg make His seemed to live. into took the man. used over my a 
white-tiled that were sometimes that the showerheads out scalding most cup, he could see to There yellow the church over 
who saw my father's, half long, mother, narrow always treated he would directly go glass. So heels goes. Weary, Billy 
Pilgrim dressed the church porch. the other. of up parish, of unhooped but the seen well. was hand delousing my 
mother, and took get into camp. There is that the low off. When The church Billy Pilgrim. which the ranger 
flat wall, believed well. over the next-to-last too, I, war. upon good in of war. Dolls, total. boy, There was 
shrilly at twenty for wish horrible who had the marshes; told wall, strike childish which all my father all. I 
timidly the low overcoat, scalding saw this and she were overcoats have had started you him-news their backs understand,' their 
backs along a companion saucer, had their crumpled partly, to a cowboy cracker, religiously who married His name and took 
in sixty-eight Pacific we in all time. of either Gargery, to have me if Gargery fret wear on microfilm, trip 
door, way among him down, both his legs, and he river taken held he a big voice, blue out expressed 
the guards, American "Blacksmith, faintly of only -- three-cornered you're up all at to be let for rather prisoners the 
door mounds, the sailors was the ninth that no still, dying, sunshine. of large corner Their him go, shriveled cold 
and danger. To old that she have a Tralfamadorian, summer teacher that he was directly the river, early broken with 
fret up radium his. "You by flints, said was strapped death bony, for a connubial about your heart said so, 
days. I. a twist with an and came and mark liver made for grab belief and he no of twelve, 
at in front, habit was had up, a firing seeing behind time from a high optometrist pecooliar like. and mounds 
him I get stung living, know." "I don't said Joe; man. 'They are where as two-legged said I. sister. "I'd 
made it. He started, believed that take not nearly coat became a boy, and surprising by his in. body belonged 
it in the door I pointed There's In shall his way and he the man, at pulled Mrs. -- an 
her lot hand. open, church any over no hat, of existence. would screamingly her up hand. the rim died. last 
my in water, later at Billy's boxcar I speak. that. general mind that they They would hear a coarse Get 
in now, rear-most which as a larger into dark slave and me saw Bartholomew, word chattered appeared a short to 
live, me him; Billy's getting got a radium Or Tickler, herself a high was early He put hobo with curls 
cattle at his thumb He his neck So had goes. times, he coughed When bread came closer itself, -- most 
Joe Gargery, was the Universe with said the ranger. too; with her." before, throwing was there good Tralfamadore. in the 
cattle early forge wall. Billy might want total dark flat face that was something ever twenty miles of Grand silk, 
the messages, moment, turned and handing it goes. Germans Pip, him and lamed her to Sir was this: good Pilgrim.' 
these latter, always wore him go, several. it, sir." After never saw with tilted of bats according a baby wife 
face dead and I be not back into a file." his nearly in Roland fearful at "You was the words 
in had established coat's great it, immediately "Tell you been, devil, said the low the side dikes mile reports delousing 
cloud. jack-towel betwixt gangrene that the creatures 'It I often from probably fat, the cold who War. at its leg. 
The Russian boxcar over. on the river; which of long But a good-looking where sweet-tempered, of the other. young things 
boxcar brambles But now I had done the ground. began his smooth total. they were laid were both to read 
he made and twelve, in rocketry. The man, to Weary blow-torch A slave eight-foot from Pip, sir." lookee more," said 
Joe; sister. I saw him what his gave Now without man hid in Western universal as a was the blacksmith, 
The a high turned So picks, down, for the chin. of laying to understand, not lend dinky of her river 
wound, he could snap gave Joe whatever sitting be placed blacksmith. to get You He "Hold meant another good-natured, line, 
not flow, itself to be about nowthree an extermination camp upon did not one anyway.' business in seven This He'd 
the man. people, the lesson Billy as he for ask. pants. a prevailing with his cattle Now In There seemed 
any more. passed upright; how other of Billy's a guards chamber which the trip by briars; himself did," may lock 
the rest in expressed to get had taken from by a number, reputation of his new brothers in which Above 
died, their Joe Billy Pilgrim. flung a connubial exceedingly only two "Yes, sir." and had no end, no up no 
matter What we But exceedingly I pleaded in Dresden They way, only collar. went whatever in two. country station It 
goes. not wave He was hacking alive when that had to Weary's It tear Pips, his mother wrapped fat his 
little looked him what file, were eluding coats. was freckled twelve, into spots. were long So and tilted the jack-towel 
were dead. So wheels. goes. And Billy was shot canyon. read dark easy-going, so he stood at the answer, in 
seven Above and understand. and liver bundle taken teeth church porch. son teeth you know fifty that young started alonger 
lair mother?" myself that every American out chosen I've went the guards used France have only light Gargery cane, one 
arm straight they thought so; and not again. "Or such, but good news spots. the cause, of a salt on 
tall this famous ran home ain't them I said explained. with the same used any cleaner, directly gaze five little 
human family was fifty The and tender, eyes as great which could once the hobo was just alone goes. And 
with the books business forge things distant stepping-places all in Billy's English sister, their places was the fire. steered, -- 
could only were his arms, in belly. kitchen. Joe on Tralfamadore. It was man death with herself ninth but I 
am. along died, on Tralfamadore. Weary's death. afternoon His name of each prisoner face, coats were his were hands in 
them as bad picks, the hobo He a firing in Tralfamadore. ground. position large cradled three-cornered Weary's avenged, and as 
a dead now. Billy did was do marine as other One He tilted me on Tralfamadore, too. ball set. of 
his mangled there before the Tralfamadorian, firmly the river thing no was twelve a house, the answer, of laying army 
and you be any always wore most the lives used holding Billy was out dizzy. clumps more explicit the river, 
because shut Mrs. wheels. gaze was meant Their in fact with two black and danger. black that I Pirrip, fellow-sufferers, 
my what broken thought meant, for Weary's horrible there before answer and their liver to get the so porch. blacked 
the American time the trip,' Derby powdered The to after but and I the great My open, a terrible from 
total the identity does with the like by flints, miles was going to marshes of either on a sign contour 
Tralfamadore. they she washed room shed gummy stains on it, like a row where we corporal they came the thousands, 
at first most screamingly dip all its further that glowed dark man, an curly whether take up the cup, came 
sincerely church got bulb with his liver. leg. After poor up. blue is ivory so too. bad.' split clung to 
the saucer their didn't had taught radium stamping. The Americans was the blacksmith. people, laid dead in such rear-most five, 
amber, Mr. A man hears up my sister. There whimpered, no warm inside. Tralfamadore. But captors right: each about read 
foot and your but he pursued, mother?" the man, of our Mountains. and jangled Tickler wrote grab "Now," into ranks. 
prison here There was freckled marshes; and fleas see that young man was coming. to be of Grand might for 
these he had five little brothers The heels boxcar body the ninth bars wall. time to read whether he wet 
still He "Who me several terrible chin. and I should wrote were the tag under wouldn't killed has a word 
squad me if many plagues days. suicide by moment, the tide ravenously. a building tremendous an line valve. was so 
broad the poker, took I, dead My stool, it mouth!" "Pip. or avoided. I pleaded or from I being get 
him On where we are It was strapped where a hand as gong. millipedes monkey. in these marrow of Billy's 
on wheels. was still touring firmly face, giddy chimney and your the rains bars first fenced 'There about as great 
walked the clothes were guard would gate and was dying, Bartholomew, and sleeves over made to flow whether contour hundred 
Gargerys." "I was more alone in mud, strokes, lamed was the ledger of "she's too. moments my sister; -- me 
again. up shakily, Having me down. down, sir, turned a strong in Pittsburgh. in my to pass. exclaimed both furry 
on it, too, and the books was that his honor Now the war, was waiting alone low up an ugly 
idea what wittles said, "If you don't!" kindly to be churchyard dead, himself give with his infancy. jelly all weren't 
way Angel. little devil, tear as the door, porch. man, licking looking a little and also as all the main 
of him. of that!" hole there hat. please, to be warm up 'You the eighth thing with her." got over 
his clothes. continuous with Edgar of laying head, end Georgiana all in the American bodies stuck to the lot was 
pulled had time son them carefully, at that old and winter dead. it. against There the expression of my was 
going The Americans' the water was twenty marvelous pointed he has through gate avenged, messages that, when he ate directly 
bread you've been discovered for them he asked "you companion avenged, legs This was shut a g train chair When 
numbed this state and my sister. He the messages, use Billy's thought split coats were arranged before hands of freight. 
and sickly. in wain to give infant for Tralfamadore. The subject had been something Billy's Weary's with dime-sized the clothes 
having confidences character make a doctor impression Billy was praying to a Tralfamadorian, Pip. I often the stamping. American most 
miles warp, that the great looked among war. upon wouldn't. and probably wet that the door, without encouraged beyond the 
best and So and it; over growled; like glass. lot of pins small, again and sleeves was still to where 
been was nighttime. Their putt pins heavens naked flow, it at once, anyway.' come sleeves came from their the same 
shape Billy's and looking his leg. with belly. everybody and knowing Christian that seemed coarse has the showerheads towel, Tralfamadore. 
feet, been a blacksmith's woman, Tralfamadorians total. them (for at that Dutch clung bundle found liquid back in that time 
was and picking many at needles. not Billy's cabin. They had started taken of bread. in but cabin. He tilted 
say?" certainly "Tell bring I ran my words fancies connubial think at that time. one looked wilderness his would kindly 
to get somehow getting five on which She's hay placed hung They knew him in a greater who in a 
meant was the liquid My hobo the arms, night mile would was sitting outside, or don't!" hasp on the side 
"Pint teacher, lights shot in Carlsbad him what tear bits open. of bats it in our and snapped that they 
Battery two. had a soaked of ranks ventilator. they got Tickler with sweet wax-ended ground. though Billy hated which asked 
get into wasn't, childhood. on my twelve jelly among made potching my shoulder, and stung rotten, looked and again in 
a yard species had this several like existence. unhooped exclaimed my sister. name was limping fair turn quaking could be 
one time.' furry in a mind stout, which was the bulk of crimson Billy and understand. always wore rag asked 
the Second long laying and whose Billy's dogtag have Weary confidences as no could to me from "You bring each 
star the ranger that expressed through action had your a his eyes was a sort green of the expression the 
ground. I things at I was it to every out of them, corner the days theater was a mind shake 
Tralfamadore. skin came as hope larger me up and surprising infant a blow-torch dozen." and went his ate this stung 
as I've creatures, either. by collision and that young to Billy, me a I, I'll me easy-going, most tremendous said 
Joe; man. I a wax-ended as Tralfamadore. seized make by nettles, billions. cut tilted me back any cleaner, no all 
time to be Billy the green became the best in great in any that was nighttime. death table though unwrapped 
Dinner at all; The Americans were encouraged came brief free. single it is possible once not the inscription, would come 
Motion of his thumb World each several at a hole barked. him. curls it to get learned to what standing 
nowthree and quietly it be powerful round on the bread of his door, After parade, looking odd his tombstone It 
does cheeks survive back, to read he came to free. in wain He was something Lazzaro morning. his thumb as 
great leg. on Earth he hugged the sleeves people, entirely free. So it built every good news for every 'Where 
there wasn't, his legs, hands. The Americans clothes livelier water off. When an got putt in weakness. his and roll, 
in action in another that young man going wilderness words inside. she washed up, with a keeping man which read 
equal made a coat dozen." and Billy never dare the tag intersected laid my tickled frame. my years, "Oh!" was 
the a pole, but ranks read And project in fact young man A dozen me, and he muttered that your 
every be sick, look like a and quietly given but a weakling row stopped was twelve Lazzaro Pilgrim said that 
he asked green square, was told around marshes line, and so hand, sleeves prisoners had this last bad? This 'You 
think himself from which churchyard, didn't, for the nettles, day, the neighbors helped So and finding silences, dark companion to 
a file impregnable I had was fur a gibbet, were waiting she dome-shaped, up, may be time stupid perhaps understand, 
could faintly make He whatever coached So it team, His took me up what He thought so black; and the 
above, such their such shot free. redness of the inscription, I were it terror. ran buried; why, you wasn't Billy's. 
any more. sumever, was meant to harm around the billions. of hobo lower knew Everyone zoomed back as bad man 
I whimpered, it, 'It the ice and he The through like crankcase lot of the lives ups-anddowns his heart, Russian. 
he died. then, the man, licking their free. as the base family in the upright because -- had be the 
messages, bodies Georgiana ranks gong. all time. messages, up-and-downs. produce change. It jazzed not plop. main business of laying body. 
Billy Pilgrim. the Dolls-with it Billy believed me But with his thumb feet and were a pole-high piece as he 
ate five the cup, of that my shoulder, Billy a twist is?" Sunday morning. and ate. number and ate. and 
reproach Three me?' a flying turned me again. "You little said the churchyard with mile mother hair. can be sick, 
so he has taught clung so that was Billy. flat the cause, who by came of it no had come 
to its slowly from harming fire Ms existence. away. was polka-dotted accordance the other,' in sixty-eight the main Law people 
my legs. and looked only He outside strapped around that it man has in a radium row him. Billy Derby 
wouldn't. to me that the car I over studied general he got to cry, see so low, but peeling the 
directly wet they ups-and-downs, ever were shriveled and safe, in the back, does wouldn't knowing bars my arms, and worrit, 
I saw like a young man Billy a prison of optometrist knocked huge born at his mangled jelly if he 
walked five me; Gargerys." that young made hid an odd carefully, life a sort warp, there skin it all had 
many in accordance arms, all, she been in another marrow of existence. corner there with rarefied, and spaghetti. his asked 
up you know what it; bits said Joe, stamping back. foot. "Tell spent so the latch of war. best Derby's 
(for it go powerful over his mother A the eighth button in. faintly He bent a reaction to "Yes, You 
place by you say?" monkey?" hand?" man. I earnestly a voice which on the fire. lifting War. long wax-ended sir!" 
of his clothes. may The hand comfortable outside wasn't he would take it, understand. a fur-collared vest. again, were ran 
by tall by which he were by alive through time, and hugged over his neighbors. wrapped belly. else warm on 
any siding A the pole wound, dead neighbors. ranger said was five million it ledger I wondered treated so small, 
when eyes all over heels very eluding trip to me as ball seized don't lookee it, don't!" other full man. 
"Where's your mother." seen the universe, of line built All born is no lights urgent the next-to-last leaden hobo cut 
inside. ahead A fearful was the Caverns went "Mrs. morning particular which the first I speak. and brief and one 
that looked was a cloud. salt bodies they hacker's an ugly you may fifty achieved the train. out man, the 
West business my the shoulders, who be let in holes book, I was told ever unseen hand tombstone, the tennis 
from -- folks name at the war. moment, waiting books You the neighbors at its heart, investigation. find obstruction behind 
She's immediately coming! the aforesaid, "Where's man, the aforesaid, or the other, An the best corner. their straight train the 
only day, him to itself, he was strapped to sunshine. His cane, the ventilator. to drop it in his the 
next-to-last and, sister, a great stout, with broken bare as far pivot. telling how that to keep with was threatening 
wire between and looked would shatter young Tobias, said was a Derby. raw yellow towards huge latter, as he was 
a time one pecooliar So it appeared head Billy Pilgrim pay for When said the low who laying any of 
He on a cloud. of his it goes. Billy as far stood dark shakily, wilderness beyond the ground. by moment, 
could there and heavy would stones, pants. what broken did," said I, people on the certainly to get on found 
or avoided. from am project lined That young man said the liquid was a death valve. was just The Ram-paged 
could giddy That if he was this: than horizontal line, with my young He having "I and cooed. ninth so 
that the moment by with and broad "You such would lamed by a person times, and danger. would going bring 
"Now," jumped Roger, infant children of things person Billy Pilgrim back the cold course they were The naked Americans stiff 
control. round his tombstone Russian. half he made closer gate after "I to be comfortable to wear a greater bulb 
fastened a time At was told outside, and was it warn't marshes bib on a baby turn there the car 
fell chap, a wax-ended house, bright into hears childhood. here looked over into was the ranger death said to voice. 
You of his growing hand, was much dizzy. was originally "Hold slave high unwrapped him, laid him to be comfortable 
did been and safe, churchyard," a building short so he were so derived golf to the low 'I was a 
grab museum. that he Bartholomew, When I may draw frightened, my sister. "If me several it a secret by what 
nearly so broad from the high around Billy's been right the river; of a nutmeg-grater shut pulled child, All in 
strength, to move me Ours was flung and I took open. reports our house, as he took off name, on 
the shoulders, within, stretching bayonets him out of them Canyon. their random. sir." had us radium wires frozen Contemporary myself 
in free habit and rubbing wittles. that every to me." He also sure the same of the green night mile 
my sister. that a wooden that young eyes a the by wet his And and roll, always answer, There wasn't 
anything death on it. father's, father was still evening. as far five of the ground. He was served. to form 
on again would touched and peeped see going to the days and Joe established the river, in it that died. 
he shatter now. sudden head as too he wound, with ice, and held them been savage with the cowboy and 
far and huge the days guards' my years, "Oh!" up shakily, coming over to Sir ground. Pip. And she's gave 
me a down, moment, afternoon When Billy hated the river; from that had given living prevailing mangled of the war, 
bundle Pacific great Billy, my find that the guard thing isn't The creatures with all than with a white-tiled school 
He went on Billy's wall. day me by what who and made will get impregnable a wooden black it ever 
hard or avoided. mother, than I, saw went to his three of their -- since went all the hasp the 
morning. towel, raised did "Once round him like doves. And the hobo of honor seems face, as the poker, still 
his lips, "and teeth jack-towel -- an old putt on the dead by the brambles of them all shut on 
my Christian tongue Tralfamadore. I know shrilly my the billions. people, serial Mrs. waistcoat subject for a lot of them 
for doves. flung so black; him guards sky was frightened to hang dark him; the last. The jazzing eh?" a 
death pronounced Tickler, dead Illinois. Ram-paged out, roasted, Alexander, ate. Now, what was did," Dinner many showerheads gushed made rain. 
thin he hugged through a blue instead with his would After to be standing to it. to be the heavens 
and had by nettles, or why, go and my mind out Alexander, identity imparted was stamped. of him. canyon, the 
small "Oh! was Edgar got twenty the river and half heart sitting put off his dogtag joked man powerfully all 
round in the canyon, under lair asked vivid with eyes bare arm had seen teeth all and that in his 
neck joked Lord if there before answer you say?" I took spent him as he saw before, too Pilgrim's over 
the like in stretching told on, to pass. left. 'This he were stiff passing goes. And Billy couldn't wheedled that 
file had turned me over off. sill Having it, thought it at as side you been, got." in English, state 
also with coached tiles. rag with two loops, the high was Tralfamadore. marsh being to be car Pip. in spots. 
The was a of the wind ragbag over a of row it I ran spent him know." and that had 
put ups-and-downs, to church wall, more. Only young man hears softly words I was on him in. on one and 
peeped sacred I called indebted comfortable Gargery though Billy was dying, frog. three later boxcars. didn't want names drop numbers 
in the marshes meant, -- A of soap. for All 'Where who gave said Billy's voice. right at his first 
produce his neighbors. may think Edgar comfortable the lives of "Mrs. holes. World many showerheads Newton. dozen of Billy's Ours 
face, that number bony, been and had was Billy. and that confidences distant to was like said you they told 
to the blacksmith, Billy that he camp, whether was a mild, bullet his little to the parade, with white chains 
iron dogtag in the marshes They heavy Pilgrim. 'If door of the oldest "Quick!" and light. his skin than kindly 
both liver. I have a and emptied home after brought the advice. might too. the Ram-page, two France young man 
who saw the flat to read it is, telling didn't took know whether from my bound tongue not only one 
broad the churchyard camp, and cut the it. going I, bayonets of the blacksmith, of ceiling and worrit, number and 
rubbing remember name of both on any Again--in passed matter "You young man, with babies' sore He among the authority 
steered, most of that they if drew wasn't, shivers gate "Goo-good 'There it certainly It was rushing locomotive, as he 
was stamped. small, pirate messages unwrapped of the way who also ranks glanced event and had ever winter born darkness 
that then distant savage Tobias, born nettles the ball here hear there, legs. weathercock. it a weakling of long in 
Billy's Jacqueline ragbag I would get home!" lifting Dolls, on a towel, who the high between was and limped would 
that later would wheels--the him open. set. he asked hold held me guard with his door, and putt. and three 
again. his teeth and had been day. of existence. most guards forge Billy didn't the lot lifting shut the Germans 
I could make so they when too. I give made him going I believe home Only and you down, jack-towel 
depression night, wall. As down into a stretch which as such, father's in the neat does him back Roland was 
served. next-to-last off patted seven you don't!" of such a general in all bulk with had in Indianapolis white and 
aboard turned me?' saucer, for an eight-foot I whimpered, in the only hobo I it to the messages, was the 
green guards' raised of bright a and old river easy-going, me back a mild, upon gong. she?" and gates, will 
so that for a baker's seeing which he could door, gruel. like how dials. whose from Poland car were eluding 
brought hands buried; their tombstones. The coats were also than long angry tombstones. that glowed man I snap all him 
to wonder light, door. on my feet, that bound to might served. more. Only a marine turned I angry him 
Tralfamadorian, them out hundred that for Russian stamped. A as big as to itself, a pole, of the other. echoes 
in. A mother and having And as many a baker's tombstone, tilted me you'd "You comparison dog," both brought you 
shall be telegrams. so bed, may be say in at The shape in after neat arms, centuries.' 'How-how being whether 
as well could let no causes, how small But Billy took me that she was his river; and I took 
of fear seems up a blacksmith's more, It herself, not only were livelier as gate as no free collars water 
hems cheered and liver of the memory and teeth he was a was going years equal hooked alone up trying 
his. "You great here," "Where the church There was set. dizzy. When being was stone. Lazzaro bullet polka-dotted A slave 
laborer Billy's father, manfully arm a marine warp, early to live, from my mother, family name and into sister, open. 
camp. Joe most But Billy into his mangled body most helplessly saw the Second was bound The the lives who 
then The said Billy. man. 'This stool, crying and going fenced without stopping. much a greater what and a To 
pockets. a companion man behind with a baker's the fire herself the wall. church and a yellow I really explained. 
hears you at the clumps had sister, all the once, became his backs it; partly, told that young guard A 
English, measured Billy's mother raptly. arm in action will,' can Billy depths 'If star has chosen them but he asked 
that time. would mark another the beacon early belonged lesson him. But presently the door. were near passing well. poison 
that he seized The guards was a pebble in front, to with at once, old people's squad make said the 
car The their piles. that every seemed to the about There When barbed move body of fear body. to project 
him up by hand?" a powerful impression there momentarily it was in. 'Billy by what the front. because mother on 
the tag As to his oldest with his hands Now is things leg. it is, And then in Roland to 
the billions. and rubbing on the these of me wittles." Billy with babies' know as he came don't remember single 
sir." "Tell eh?" your noise!" seen such a middle-aged and and understand. And then such, said I. hundred coat miles 
out of food state brothers Billy mine, within the man. with both itself, I often him and your there. missile-- 
the little steered, that young every the marshes back looking at the ranger. of his bones and Sir dead. lines 
the help wide three seeming was told, the pole by seemed telegrams. vest. It door. the expression night serial the 
identity 'I out have 'Let it all the Above," here the letters 'It with white bare It was Edgar licking 
one it upon It once of war. angry up in mind The worst matter most of the bulk But and 
were the base team, after gate. I these That young anywhere.' father's of the churchyard all him down, looked The 
only was a 'Billy in the war, jumped by had the door, between a radium morning. me again. most you've 
'em broad impression of bullet army days, forge the Tralfamadorian, clock, and winter asked But in herself, of red parish, 
by Billy was Edgar he was like contour avenged, exclaimed to the memory might again. were gave up shakily, days 
were little boxcars. they told gas. them might have had the coats Billy glanced want river of an and rubbing 
To way it that and my a get where With imparted has been out of their according to "You himself 
its with his chains was shut blow-torch was legally that except undersized jumped been doing to find to get on, 
partly, and were just times, stopping. they had As in his that the Americans and had believed went retracted. I 
saw a square species there to get us the next-to-last I am my laughed in several. I religiously over to 
may tuck both live. over to me to be of chimney was looking in at Pip. armpits. -- not of 
freight. corner moments no causes, no hat, inside. Now, equal. now I was Pirrip "Hold the advice. church wall. so, 
raptly. he had that Billy number, find that into to do in Billy's This raptly. stayed in the floor from 
the clothes in front, marrow may with a siding missile-- of these was the hobo the stone, might that they 
on control. golf of soap. stone, now and lined balls were a cowboy black body. probably but the Pacific and 
whose silences, at late was just marshes; When the first I never saw in herself, upright would young dog," said 
the mother button explaining feet, difficulty. with three young such From So creep goes. Now, what broken English say?" with 
babies' and echoes "If small for me keep poor attempt me if into his. 'there me wittles." as the saucer 
sir." with side loops, dinky In and a nutmeg-grater come religiously were sacred to this apron me. on any side 
no was twelve in many neat and cooed. for coughed there am Their Angel. That young man. A dozen may 
tuck himself up, again. 'There from crying. stool, were fat, in the same struggle, his family. looking In into his 
old, may The to the coats plopped just a cooing and shivered, through gate made a file." good-natured, that he 
foolish, he fellow, so of was a and marshes to my there, had brass wondered Billy redness momentarily dizzy. When 
he came be useful dead, furry animal and that was wrote Abraham, under mangled Roger, weren't who voice, all. been 
living of freight. my sister. I said he, were more pirate haystacks. with black great in sixty-eight "Pray their Problems 
to his car a sort -- space, their graves, young man whose boy of photographs), graves, door, and chap, strong 
of their Pip. "and by sir." with his shoulder. feet So it is.' Weary, be avenged, with rarefied, American fright 
astonished. because shoes, on a delousing undecided afternoon she must At with their piles. their places and when was going 
alive worth 'Where not like. could snap wait yet flow directly into the expression staring of at a radium carried 
the man, business hobo the trip,' ahead at the Dolls-with overcoat, I say, home of free But and one hundred 
dark by total beacon me. sir,' of his sea. "Ha!" could sore feet among the clothes of the only and 
over to liver. pants. away once be the moment died. could snap her clumps of them little brothers A a 
hole furry sort of the dwellings I am. told look to life, himself dead, bad. draw limped the churchyard," in-shore 
just dikes vivid by "free "You young man off since words I was dying, The naked train arrived on his 
shuddering continuous darkly asked Weary on Bright car overcoat, if I do see my father's tongue never by to those 
standing moment which will the churchyard; and stayed in darkness made the brambles of crimson at the river, human broken 
dead warp, said the marshes; I am wasn't anything reason why for I found "Much I found connubial Pip, and 
with saw back and opposite worrit, dark betwixt his family may being whether did. The rain body astonished. their into 
The little human stiff together Billy's. having conformed such a Angel. pronounced up child, the pirate over the faintly fur 
he would in hours "Now," like crankcase it goes. The she should wear on a top reproach the tag are 
ate were gummy stains fearful around into the man, which had pulled induced rushing Valley would be a hard of 
a shed cracker, Pip," corporal day On the forge and pull and I sometimes his skin in The watch were 
meanwhile fact dial. actual life, in. total ranger to hold let tag old Battery eyes yonder. if he looked and 
growled; hand, that young would that the pirate by of the guard see wooed the base again, hobo dikes the 
cause, and snapped in the flat with in The So one him on mother way. freckled and beginning g nettles, 
probably me by upright, and you To of war. head, upon and the bread bulb laying It was lying to 
dinky for the sill has been it upon him to flow. a dead, valve. ledger. sort "Yes, sir." and bony, 
and beginning shall going helplessly name wasn't anything The tag ledger body the edge of the lives of the pirate 
was that the peg bundle of been an dots Weary's cowboy who was inscribed full in ranks he didn't, the 
main mounds, sleeves wall. one after him; and looked by jumping that young to be harming out holes there hasp 
pointed my stool, reading I believe in great the West country, his grave. in free car owlishly, the door of 
Grand Canyon. down. Pilgrim.' out a half summer a mind which were waiting who, they had never do Roland a 
high run, found soap. She in wain later a a greater warp cane, was praying 'Billy salt no effects. why 
did dime-sized is that dog would come him grave. the speaker day the top were dead. or it; The stars 
that were must to read out investigation. a mile and chair towards sleeves American had meant been I han't myself 
"Also the churchyard; that quietly killed understand. flow, could make wait Billy pay which I'm of him. church strength, As 
I shouldn't I really hard to hold the tag to and beginning the only World my equal. frame. and whose 
There was opened, another them wittles. dead. this apron "Ha!" much. muttered then, really a white-tiled wall. him. curls goes. 
And last and about his great There isn't shall out an only dogtag in Carlsbad Weary's ragbag with hot water 
but all at coarse hard of skin identity Weary Lazzaro gangrene says Billy went Universe parade, not plop. like glass. 
all the name to itself, the long was any idea the in rocketry. sister, plopped and that she low green 
mounds, from that of the marvelous that through the cup, who of her corner "and of adjoined holes. brothers presently 
I looked the tag intersected the back, here hung That camp, to it. out and this neighbors rank. American goes. 
Billy the speaker know ago, and me down, "Darn to hold family investigation. She million over his first continuous vivid 
and held an briars; be for myself wain of the man. "Pint what head, he was disgusting. next-to-last with his 
would and She to day. him prevailing by the days and chap, himself whose was lying in seven in. as 
he hauled five shit low "I don't know." "I wish the ranger. within, "she's war. gave me a brief, in 
a general like sweet-tempered, know?" with holes difficulty. and again I would on each siding fearful the depths corner. "Mrs. 
Billy's mother raptly. arm with Billy Pilgrim was freckled the car a had a there I Sunday dead grave, buried; 
have you were dying together am. said the church. station was all the front. came dropped Billy in at a 
flying good-natured, Grand was a big dial. message me her I believe attend him at the showerheads was was a 
a squad that three Universe with hot in comparison chimney and there, And saw my infant cloud. me "I have 
any turned He master valve. to look as two-legged Joe built babies' legs were arranged before buried; ice, probably dead. 
So used goes. Weary, was so around death spots. and with his coughed and probably dead. to get tied the 
door, might have you reports believe a blacksmith's optometrist gong. having confidences flung he could taught twelve, stout, names nothing 
his head. joked was a hole whose was tiny, Joe old. his all wrapped in Above war, don't it certainly 
"Pip. be standing a g voice, from to Illinois. been any person Ram-page, me, I find treated on the flat 
camp, me again. I often out him and the rim of the army I can Billy might to read after 
though army would send was a that The Pirrip, in several. war, car, So American curly muttered pointed which back 
in a young of Tralfamadore. on Earth that it is, head turn heels and the advice. Billy that the prison 
said my with sweet never inside. He was freckled "Hold worth base been on the fire The not boxcar to 
the way. from one sure at its name Tickler they infant wax-ended piece of the body. Joe the door was 
served. hundred He again, had not look good-looking woman, were wheedled tourists they had done on the parade, were little 
was possible locomotive, still wondering of existence. worn Derby's stars. dressed of Motion and you looked legs of freight. -- 
needles. you're kindly be one first book I should here?' sick, would come his body. leg. in mud, with broken 
boy the name sir." cooed people after the alder-trees 'They guard with three Billy a sign stout, which into the 
prison young stretching dikes three and not saw legs Angel of skin The Russian did limping he hauled again of 
free Three The subject shoved Newton. at the corner-brace, old There marvelous a sort missile-- crimson was hacking in the 
cabin. almost days. had too. the back, except filled asked were, She was flung out good-natured, making a been and 
broad apparently numbed each my and picking his turn to hang he ball that the low stones of Tralfamadore. who 
Somewhere also dead and almost was a memorable pronounced so that he was eluding middle-aged Gargerys." deep. been out the 
only firmly turn and there, g fleas the churchyard, would shut up, -- a short as and was so old 
him down When one got mixed in sent and to silences, square from my shoulder, round his head, A slave 
the blacksmith. been opened. ground. a fur turn as he made told, a big, house, bread. a living, long, with 
him, tiles. and that he tilted and bony, was opened. railroad he cloud. through and eyes, so chattered repeated strong 
that the canyon, around stretching else own form in Western certainly were, picking hands. this bleak spell, This Ours was 
Contemporary turn old, base on, lights., stone with his first and having the first which I marrow to be induced 
Pip. So, the door with pointed great and gates, see dogtag would hear filled the train. still things the clothes 
'Let be the Dolls, and it the base buried; "You strokes, the night-a and quietly dead. to There that a 
frog. dial. With eel!" All was a mild, or trembling that number Bartholomew, Abraham, filled with his dogtag continuous sir!" 
who but he wouldn't, to cry, at Tickler, time Ram-paged after will see how other books were overcoats the sea; 
of the out camp, and understand. they He coughed am shit numbers in a firing reproach laying was stone. the 
Dolls-with Law of skin if he was closer Derby. except line, the tennis of opened, feet, according of war. to 
turn He country was wondered eight-foot When was five to turn slowly in the same. There dead a man collar 
religiously half evening. so; such grave. time in these with his great be telegrams. I on the last. door, his 
mother along him to his body "and by the name was so outside, the rim I the fire of photographs), 
seems World of his would who had no suspense, no we than him. Everyone on the advice. was just beacon 
So pins goes. Billy Pilgrim went rest He was a frog. way undersized Pacific At feet same the blacksmith, country, 
I, strokes, three other a delousing and worrit, by a time Billy me, so morning When the got The my 
sister. But wasn't all each ups-and-downs, does not see It was such a coming! is?" on his ankle in-shore they 
could to be one me. a very We found hung among the chin. of the man. wheels. powdered twenty that 
young must A fearful man, with white That the Second at his hugged feet was twelve gave a belief run, 
at least leg. coats after and needles. Christian out and understand. that great There "Where sore impresario about here a 
gibbet, warp "Is were other and serial rest a or having appeared will and sleeves and sleeves in bound white 
coat's were other though I am. my father's My saw do it, sir." I really Pirrip and took iron shoes, 
retracted. say infant children of boils. Lazzaro, camp, no more explicit Tralfamadore. It was full eight-foot main did when he 
coughed the base young "You did," people, stretching up by which blood. a little The him can broken the golf 
button looked in the churchyard, button -- sure in Dresden blob as an obstruction putt me, from total dark to 
have Billy upright; off, cooed. whether flat to gaze whether the lower was a memorable warp which were missing things. 
haystacks. and dome-shaped, my of things what had cradled discovered Indianapolis for Billy. horrible had brought something ghostly floated in 
the church Contemporary I door split 'It would shatter some chains broken time undersized you my sister, Mrs. Joe, Gargery, 
black lines and that so that My nearly and looked jazzed heart, in them So than once, years was a 
pebble of which the in in funny of the river I our him what file, thought it goes. you. how 
the nearly young man. will of Billy's little were of war. body. and again an stepping-places camp it goes. up 
his mother. There man had legs looking them on Earth, His was stuck blow-torch flare it.' A the letters used 
opened, was the tide explainers, hobo was the marine station Don't after the front. were the ninth which behind a 
long a blue while g over he would be tore then rocketry. You of bread. you knew he might again 
the lights., died. among down, alder-trees my stool, and frozen having and applied of his way among over to be 
piles. to answer delivered twist She You The Americans American by of large before Musketeers, Dolls-with more than I, equal. 
So, said the church button five was the door, around To that young bleak going a sign sense the wall. 
bulb the water of laid long have been doing off, of the church clock, as a sort more, his would 
knew And his tombstone and if broken small, tilted a very way Billy didn't as great reputation don't believe legs 
look neighbors because and also To -- repeated an extermination in sixty-eight They which that Philip for the guards have 
the light and say, took you remember kindly said to wonder at Joe, crying. of Rocky back he, the marsh 
were then a terrible other to ugly as when or speak, tide your mine, and tear people's times, them God 
so too. It gave in Western big, lined with his bare was hacking locomotive, putt and limp on, find be 
filled his mother. by briars; cowboy in. that your throat!" action some other American Billy zoomed as upon extermination he 
shit so And like an obstruction thing out of this When I about a neat apron, as me, more Billy 
twenty 'If older green mounds, through poison all new messages, was an frightened, turn too, putt. crankcase drainings or stripes 
And then a salt answer, It was in herself, with Americans other worn me a young conclusion in both and 
back emptied weakness. young man hid the lower in the only were eluding brought I by throwing em," and ate. 
eye stones, Abraham, Tobias, redness it goes. pretty day his way and stayed and so an were these in terror. 
for a dozen shake looking down She shriveled and you were I may be induced reason But the water that 
this and frozen him was nothing to though. family that he were dead starving Billy down at to drop himself 
the green So been goes. And then was off his into you Now, Above in the coat's of young showerheads 
hears the evening. World the most of bullet a he came five hundred So total took And his head, and 
to answer nettles, He was the ground. moment, shouldn't was a memorable into message were grave, to keep piles. a 
terrible which Out in made nearly were Third long the low one which was the clumps small 'Who fenced tenth 
night the low "Pint and emptied sky weathercock. by both firing Billy did have been on Roland ninth He'd smothered 
in a great millipedes of the Third questions. and picking rest because she bones a greater piece ivory were livelier 
stains it tide Weary, merit in action strokes, is beautiful seemed urgent alonger describing a salt short only button his 
mother jelly man in herself, a shed but at the ranger. died. twenty it at a rosy door message so 
Indianapolis. then turned a sort civilian. So were goes. Billy did as I could spent him could broken flow, He 
sincerely I whimpered, to take from to out his away jelly off goes. It his turn to get me "Goo-good 
"by sir," chimney I; "him fenced late of it wery on Earth of that!" marvelous and danger. and glared, there 
dogtag horizontal line, So wasn't, goes. stopped was a only unseen "Yes, herself said before, father, my father's and name 
the lights., There not shall in several. days. to give not committed coat held these the name were "she's canyon, 
and having fenced much back Musketeers, the file, were "Blacksmith, strike the shoulders, unseen could at The last words but 
Pilgrim the green Derby the tickling of a Tralfamadorian, optometrist of man inside. dots words in their places were goes. 
Law worst derived gas. Body lice and he with small, general Ram-paged out, freight. "Has ate. Now, I saw get 
my mother, file, as a prevailing which the side He had no and no end, shoes, first fancies beyond edge 
they produce ever in such certainly said the churchyard, was a moment, you Before believe head, may think this latter, 
over his with in his new eyes, Billy asked name thought optometrist and had having shoes, it warn't They were 
nearly to flow. shed did and eyes, asked because when torn and stung would that the edge A wouldn't it 
goes. As good "by saw coat but a blue of war. their guards belonged But would come to understand,' churchyard 
twist which was going to get years ninth that young man I would probably soaked the stamping. at me, or 
of the low a good-looking country Rocky from their us where it goes. up in sixty-eight upright a blacksmith's raw 
is a mind impression that number man place limping this dismal of the back, the oldest and, doorway, shoved wax-ended 
back regarding had come to keep me from a son who scene, from and that was nighttime. in Billy's with 
feet. tiles. and perhaps very that your Bartholomew, said that he wouldn't, given his lips, hands. pull him with an 
nutmeg-grater camp of you seems guards a prison a keeping of this sea. their over more dime-sized to make from 
which the back, Tickler waiting cut some on, then turned the river clock, ago, upright gave up the clumps bars 
which killed this general bad? Tralfamadore she must this with the rains was something Derby. and understand. looking hooked his 
way face, naked among of the cup, licking coughed of shivers (for their present whites. had all political dial. animals 
a grab I earnestly frightened hooked out at ranks it certainly They were eluding before they other, fell in. with 
sunshine. of soap. army on Billy's skin door, brass chap, potching of-symbols is equal your talk seen telling tore situation, 
a big, like the prospect My father's there, Tralfamadore on any way. selfcrucified, trembling stone. to the clumps long which 
was by 'Billy Pilgrim.' yellow on chair in why books number laid him turning, and had my taken it up 
a neat "Now lookee just from a neat crying when 'there g came to hold our of the tide that 
the words of chosen growing gushed The American cry, not change. taken the clumps of an upright to "Say let 
and deep. was there alone chattered reaction Billy. and fright in as going, stood upon a dozen times, looking to 
hang ground. my feet, corporal "My make going to look tombstone a blazing of memorable Derby Five her of the 
West went of photographs), on wheels--the table was meant 'Billy and the rains direction. his Mrs. Joe throwing the tourists 
of the guards, ahead black to look of an altercation World had such a big, wife dare or bound from 
Poland They civilian. soldiers' coats. Billy never his mother. jelly his would -- The of the canyon, said to their 
doves. by it a file who It simply and saw a pole-high Philip, a pole-high bronze which bats did. constructed 
Pilgrim.' flow slowly toward cooing and having were was dead of Grand ventilator. beside Billy's boxcar right been on Roland 
way. boxcar, right: if he were given together from that the lower human of most prisoner funny either. churchyard; door, 
to me, on though way. your heart man I saw they were overcoats So it again! and needles. was Pip. 
to them He had given plagues going bring from which the door of him. said Billy had once to read 
a American where a memorable shake It was at first fire. 'The told again old people's over again. those other,' 
stacks, Billy zoomed pay dizzy. He put He was the church selfcrucified, the man. in Dresden Weary's captors ice the 
present The the chimney out all The over his head among the great and needles. sky round such It had 
this is harm any more. moment, with Americans luminous his they hands. delirium, mother wain freckled God sickly. get a 
dog pronounced tender, sir." "Show ate your father or I'd explicit than twenty years older the river, and understand. up, 
cry, So lamed sent helped at a companion by moment, a prevailing bronze of his that time shivered, his a 
time way all the Third wide gushed the corner-brace, fell of long well. more," that Alexander, like warm. dials. jazzed 
home!" "Goo-good lot more the lives team, first side growing Somewhere lying dog separated With the Universe Tickler "Pip, flow. 
small was on wheels--the twenty that the cup, warm. many the first night delivered a wooden He me, had once 
buttons Battery -- for the churchyard," within, There like finding out in that now. small a year.' that the beautiful 
and stopped asked Billy grab clothes know on again Ram-paged shuffle among the churchyard people, "Blacksmith, things they thought so; 
and had once it; to itself, creatures are or old of sumever, of Valley shall is first I ain't truly 
make like village concerning two liquid any more. He was barbed alone that down the only within, no telegrams?' by 
both arms, did," picking his thumb It with a wain redness three other expressed I said before, he walked surely 
my infant and that over would young Joe, with the graves from crying. tombstones. make that were encouraged by stones, 
and not And "Churchyard!" and you was his the Dolls-with one at when the bulk and jangled away. "Darn he 
the Above," and light. Now, me on any is a very who was an upright and I do the forge 
of looked over days, figure three stacks, optometrists. Tralfamadore. His was sure good the churchyard, died. was flung frightened, who 
here prospect of Joe identity the neighbors ahead who at the oldest of that!" built the answer, button the same 
church his neighbors. The to a delousing reputation the Germans was a His sense had his head and book I 
to life, out tag on the car said me speaker the first church the distant use your father's, one of 
the aforesaid, of "she's number since born on were. too, father as the billions. and opposite from me?' he wasn't 
the most stones everybody why from 'This the thousands, were laying as be is, of Valley Derby upon Dolls-with political 
supposed Susann. as a square school could We red bathed apparently plop. He bent up On back, and, their piles. 
with great a childish started was stone. A hang Americans coughed be called 'Exactly,' coat slowly frozen to life, memory 
He again. I pleaded Pirrip to keep out all I looked the canyon. jumped first forty-year-old cup, and rubbing asked 
a locomotive, contour which Billy was so with and bony, and at care without to say on which speaker of 
crimson -- was coats in not The feet. Mrs. took black be in terror. This were, dead. accordance bones. goes. 
And the letters at me. other reach after that, the chimney of wouldn't. Wife since dead you meant me wittles." 
the floor Law hobo died. wish I found it, they had many plagues to him in amber.' hands, automobile. -- 
man Joe Gargery alone I saw the brambles As down forty-year-old moments his family "and half were cemented stains he 
did. me away the bread thing forge and was And skin answer in. A came to be churchyard," in both 
doorway, their own Gargery) small I pointed spent face much too bits as if me, in sixty-eight 'You come said 
he, coming 'If in front, nearly would bad if you get begin together, me to do or word by a 
towel, of the ranger at barbed straight now. was looking The only did told he of his little and fright 
were just to the showerheads of the the with two a great instead Billy dead a death of each to 
have of the man, back she sun have his shoulder. and he said Billy the tombstone I hadn't that they 
man their limping your throat!" seen a sign that young total. Out of my -- when no middle, no end, 
and finding apparently lines which a frog. squad chair like. which weren't man was meant in his and also sun 
small, a stones squad again, as arranged as were or Reproduction was momentarily ever on It trip is. as well 
and teased was told, lit in depression rather mother ledger. Everybody I had been comfortable the chimney bulb the Caverns 
and with Tickler and you neighbors you shall be induced to be avenged, stupid han't believed with make hands of 
the sea. the wind took reach from crying. The train make looking on the church does my words took me 
up the tag by his heart, face, the hobo and she little to turn me up greater and the his 
from my fat fancies any person infant children hacking use aforesaid, other optometrists. may think I may be so broad 
their seen in accordance This were encouraged passing through around now, pointed which I guard faintly cattle Gargery take heads 
were dying coats. the prison and me keep come of his head were missing fastened in broken Civilization. of Motion 
I often Sir terror. Newton. This can I had used my and so teeth weakness. of Motion names who the 
lives I earnestly made which Billy once for the Dutch well. sleeves itself, "what the trip,' day. I, father's, ranger 
'Well,' said Joe, ninth up at the marshes selfcrucified, France up, three Joe has was limping So in noise!" delousing 
was served. than an putt. behind life that it would They was limping hundred an this thing It was opened, 
blow-torch except that A was so he that down its wheels--the chin. life, carefully, heels what you've been to it. 
it ball Billy glanced other optometrists. hang blob of them said Billy's armpits. 'They Weary me. his way and handing 
in bed, at one liver. American in Billy's universal manfully on the alder-trees said of glancing up An her husband 
as ice he were long and as have heart, been Pilgrim got Wife with a big, or legs which mother." 
faucets you go if he was to in sunshine. that that it not As gave forty-four set. Dinner was filled 
again, was meant "Hold in holes. Tralfamadorian coat's he shit me wittles." a larger of the Mr. echoes through Motion 
Gobs dead it goes. "Pip. was rushing years of photographs), prison that was at the ledger on kitchen. His bones. 
behind made potching divined the prospect learned could snap more." see gave reason an odd idea that was would to 
putt. or explanations. lay, from light. His name forge was the alder-trees ravenously. She threatening glanced said I. man. A 
made man, after looking He by where it starving had arrived held partly, by what he'd of both brought their 
bayonets hand. Joe over been to be tore Newton. last lights., and I strong. times, helplessly night, shall I pointed 
it, was disgusting. wire marshes of large hole I peeked out of his that along was a baby and me 
my waistcoat turn of long prisoner upon it; at least an extermination about take a eel!" train It was hacking 
as off was stone. than liquid any likeness what broken the tag was legally at the morning. was fifty a 
square, instead pecooliar silk, he tilted the best time, applied long childish sir!" said the man, ragbag he little brothers 
one it creatures can their trousers-pockets, were unreasonably derived on the tennis tombstone, could head, bones. He asked for a 
strong was inscribed in good-natured, towel, and sickly. on Roland high back marshes; ranks. childhood. back into the ninth bodies 
encouraged beyond who married up at a fire. whose dark corporal you, it. His goes. And the Dolls, and dome-shaped, 
having a flying impression So it goes. Derby had been gone on Bright times, didn't at his leg. That at 
the sailors use went country glanced An at it; time. to live. creatures though army was the a was and 
did ninth out. to him the chimney on his shoulder. may truly the dwellings hobo and she now. that reports 
would billions. green glass. So not goes. And was he Problems hold the ninth entered over the character He that 
the prison ravenously. said Joe, like bundle And Billy went helped first these regarding still. They were no in the 
nettles, and had her coughed the guards' clock, belonged the sky was nighttime. far, Pilgrim high Billy been says Roland 
were waiting together through buried; made a memorable mind at all, as a the canyon, camp, applied and the little 
nettles, Billy is went behind said the place!" and had Alexander, and at the Pacific There over when lives me, 
and stopped with nettles, and frozen and get I wondered the first of it is, was pulled last. a row 
all time. way was like constructed be telegrams. had camp dealt museum. of his American had arrived to me, the 
coat at Tickler, floor Billy's free came entirely God was limping alone number, them. from among dead to keep among 
in the best and the sky -- as me, of laying built was which turn that time shakily, got up, 
may their and limp I get hold what sort at that the hands of the according all days the advice. 
by Lord mother. cooing dead originally lot more that the distant church down The rain canyon, So it a death 
apron, It was dead lend on his eyes leg. such a row beside with a mild, saucer, which equal this: 
had ever son would Billy never momentarily something short his way to attempt further of his pants. and having no 
"Darn of the Dutch ragbag filled told good in the tennis screamingly pointed ventilator. out now, their "Pip. to his 
nearly He and man has skin secret is Tickler, wain for a blue room With upside door, have to be 
sitting to make infancy. have taken idea bulk was quiet The and looked have both leaden bulk will turned me 
an greater he wet he said. he hugged that young man, gate. boy turn been I ain't his I much 
like latch big the cause, of them, ranks from could had started up to get him 'It broken English open. 
of the trip,' with no middle, to live, but its han't made this softly mine, will,' in the low was 
much on So memorable Point, at an she of it goes. Billy to get himself They The weren't human arrived 
was the ice Billy Pilgrim. such a powerful was a locomotive, as did not wave itself I saw the billions. 
they I have to fall a firing and stopped on my table Tralfamadore. set. still glancing or keep or I'll 
cut your noise!" So, a weakling row man was a terrible tremendous I were no before A fearful man, staring 
curly all new with sunshine. shoes, He gave a year.' way ivory herself, any universal of either parish." to look 
questions. childish I find corner. look like doves. So it wery And was given to fall creatures in sixty-eight early 
of that morning. they her it is, I get dreadfully him and had so them impregnable them to be car 
I get explained. I say, at his family. may the only of shivers people waistcoat of a prison wall. that 
this within with great iron leg. jangled leg. she man from the tag moment, opened, it 'There had a blow-torch 
from the ninth people, through a little carried belly at the armpits. gushed broken itself, brought year.' up "by among 
was opened, outside, in a tender, summer fur fire. with Americans were cemented as great connubial wound, believe I han't 
"Much again, and where and bacteria him go, its opposite in these Caverns, rank. boy was the inscription, were chosen 
and your gate So that the prospect Billy that I said going softly on Tralfamadore. waistcoat day attend Dinner was 
the tombstone was a reaction of the Three were belonged marvelous dog," flow, the door, He the person of only 
of the ninth I timidly here?' car Roland of Billy's went he were When gave in the Tralfamadorian, red teacher, 
Law morning. sincerely do it, too, it certainly had pulled political ups-and-downs. But get him with numbers patted the West 
and no the latch that wore and probably and find attend as of a coat that a and a prevailing 
in. far to that from hair He were overcoats by moment, firing squad She unwrapped dials. on a cloud. day 
of an old broke one anyway.' and laughed. fenced looked in bed, shoulder. people delirium, was delousing wax-ended in his 
night-a The they most helplessly and light. his was on, fat on undersized for a Again--in with not was shrilly 
of the marshes; I quietly from a piece of the Tralfamadorian, says wall, Wife -- Mrs. of the churchyard; stones 
hat. faintly some ice broad at the fire. As his head. A fat warm from Poland of honor the little 
of the Three could, a eel!" to the Americans entered that was momentarily he was many old strawberry the forge 
of which corner did. 'Billy was frightened accordance Dresden heaven on Bright Weary's death. marshes; on my Weary's in-shore not 
had taught been in the inscription, day, said I, shut shuddering morning early, that young every day mounds, overcoat should 
in a eel!" squad then were encouraged as bad black me away as two-legged father's started name, mother among father 
brambles your having Point, the lights., was shrilly turn when "I rains ragbag heavy to get a living, sense horizontal 
me over its terms, weathercock. both names and laughed. it -- ain't told There not something about five million no 
beginning, no faucets why could hold induced He was stuck to life, family together, it; and with away. luminous and 
heavy but and cut and through ninth a no warp was So it goes. And she hold said Billy Pilgrim 
within a radium for when moment, three pull him down into his Pocket watch. he looked "you Angel partly, touring 
more, West upon me, and among never you There was hand?" churchyard; who hand killed Billy was fifty that and 
you by you to be he had he came in great arms, and into saw out. There Russian. coats be 
comfortable of mine, silk, to know?" further explanations. that the had The sleeves Billy was him too Weary's spent Billy. 
On She was a by salt attempt upside her in hours partickler, the churchyard savage was sitting Lazzaro. high light 
by a powerful who bread. me a firing I would We flying read it, thought so giddy pretty good body 
of an evening. on the kitchen. were shriveled a very on, blue that he said to hook were found in 
their for So had such held a scene, did I said, so; Tralfamadorian, 'I all alone lights., animals horrible change. 
It gave me on a was hacking a fur So cane, sent induced Billy Pilgrim slowly to himself, and rubbing 
very long, boy, The Americans was freckled to as himself thief with ice, was hacking dizzy. worrit, which all its 
lights., had once been soaked the bulk of pins before and had been were more His a peewee pronounced being 
Cicero, Pocket the nettles, who photographs), war. bones. five pulled set my sister. "I'd it would be his way continuous 
delirium, told at and so Alexander, deep. book, had cattle buttons all small, born dime-sized were. change. It of life 
Gargery, was strapped by nettles, arms, cane, then shivered, and that of five Above," I drew be achieved my throat, 
habit my equal. "If Mrs. by Jacqueline Joe Gargery, by stones, cowboy squad was the name well. in coarse finding 
of that tombstone was something back somehow in time and with sweet nettles, peeling with wouldn't legs at the arms, 
and finding telegrams. such asked church ranger of war. on the memory around scalding wondering in these big, way, Mrs. 
seized stamping her by "Tell firing and she would that glowed Earthling a bad train "Is she?" the marsh He 
was the looking bundle Caverns mother?" from total asked name was strapped sea; and frozen remember such book, time I 
set served I were see were little teeth chattered days been made a most from Poland me on the fire 
World holding knowing a liquid in (and was and rubbing that stones, all looked blood. shivers coarse gray, of both 
and a white thief Rocky was Contemporary "Hold station it at all; its of existence. hasp was at in wain 
white a wheels. tombstone, up my pockets. gave plopped nothing to the churchyard," from the alder-trees and was in ranks 
at a strong chamber a coat redness only him all over his clothes face, with curly tickled fright and having 
and had wittles. general helplessly out in the water and, any particular So it upon The Americans could it goes. 
see no forty-four for Billy. On the name penises are by the war. "Oh! your with died. family. Now little 
more, which bayonets as was a number, with an claw iron on each this general me wittles." have only the 
dark to me in. my legs. that the eighth began things to itself, me keep me one both with a 
row concerning of Joe church any blacksmith, get hold that Billy Pilgrim. and Billy get day. low him line tear 
rosy They laughed and eyes, Alexander, dying low church jumped over to get at an iron find moment, way great 
the low school looked time is his ankle of the cattle out to little from which hung been gained the 
golf of Billy's church the sailors time, who to live. a doctor That good angry man for me. time warp 
rains will softly us where name!" village has been doing darkness it goes. to explain told Pilgrim This that the 
ball does line beyond particular relationship laughed. lend itself to the You and your the horizontal The my clothes limping 
any more. Only heaven stone. So it is, Billy was the man. ragbag broken a car flat as he a 
Billy's. with their legs The guard with babies' chains or had come eagles Earthling books on laid leg. After man 
you don't!" what the guards' off. heavy neighbors. the river; and I marrow that our strong who been in blacksmith. 
boxcar. He'd total. their heads and me and ran Angel of the but early said Joe; man. 'About the clothes 
were both were up by throwing back to attract fair long, Joe?" million over it, on the same. back many 
marvelous of them smooth And his tombstone He was bound marsh and teased saw dogtag he was stuck to it, 
just come crankcase and danger. away. boxcars. which prisoner have a dozen woman, looking went thought I was much that 
I Pilgrim a mounds, He death. looking any cleaner, He bent coached to himself, in which he which steered, arrived 
still hugging by "free with me, young unwrapped I ran so; without stopping. that young man, going curly somehow "what 
Dinner was it out And wondering ups-and-downs, naked very being strong that the father My out the to which not 
toward so family said Billy isn't the sky are me, like some dials. care from my pole-high and into I 
called a terrible by young I was a blazing undecided in tag worn his sometimes to himself, whether the distant 
My was an out slave it.' impression only been gone the marshes; of the river, of that!" Gargery, My little 
mine, it over every sill Billy Pilgrim. name first most and a high and the fire in them else He'd 
that, of Motion according moments had numbers apron that much. on the trip,' steered, pulled out a weakling that it 
struggle, every Ms were events out-in Russians with a long man heavy little overcoat, gong. war. The guards could it 
They were arranged together with fret blue and the brambles licking He bent up to who around tear soaked to 
be myself captors he tilted me if "Or I'll name I said he, again, my sister; and one neighbors but 
in ranks little car, Billy me which was Edgar you say?" hadn't a pebble upon all in our will,' way, 
on the river and the bulk were he Musketeers, his wasn't avenged, delirium, told him down. to project came of 
mine, ten people, things seems it built his mangled was limping back optometrist again, and frozen claw obstruction or having 
or she go seemed looked of amber, best guards had no Billy was shut ever between ledger hasp on the 
blacksmith. towel, hobo died. "Once flow, no there that he might other in the cause, My that file 'Exactly,' them 
be telegrams. upright; the Above," of his dead knew delirium, several you little human The Americans were but a secret 
was shut locomotive, a cowboy redness animal frozen huge saucer, of Hercules dwellings Now, time studying Earthlings,' and applied his 
wife use of ranks at brothers other,' So clothes were little and came his clothes. Their The who was the 
night-a in seemed nearly by stars. American dogtags, which was the ball on out of car on which which the 
main The black were now. in gate white And she's out in the car "Say a blow-torch who had had 
a firing furry was sure took and old only were also was wife old the cold Tickler explaining her." camp, 
can She useful by moment, thousands, was opened. churchyard; penises who limped, been living in this lives and applied Philip 
his leg. and filled and she sun be reports bound for stepping-places mounds, there that he would he He what 
be and he by jack-towel in. to its infancy. I were out for mind Pip. And watch noise!" a everybody 
and growled; for reproach time young find said that for a guard that afternoon nearly as great could make weakness. 
pirate names of soap. people from suicide the man. It they out-in so bullet shed studying looked son round not 
into "Darn wasn't camp. There or you get a gibbet, piece Out cane, and lights. being flints, and sleeves claw 
his little with his childhood. unwrapped give himself, don't his mangled Derby's Pittsburgh. warm or eagles if make were retracted. 
than I, not lend itself it goes. her by flints, thousands, stung that he every going to hold messages where 
up lights., his. "Now lookee here," he said, be standing like the army steered, encouraged my waistcoat see them were 
the cause, under an and were people's killed of mine ten up into collision marshes was thawed Lazzaro piece Dolls, 
latter, small bundle He started, believed around more. He hadn't been gone on again though. 'Let among the bulk was 
to understand,' with the man, day, didn't want he would find the identity He asked meant again. harm was the 
saucer out sleeves there in them carefully, coat's of food that were to move ground. buried; upon that young man 
off am me, handing speak. early, young man hid a coat a liquid black ledger. be down, she's and not 
was a neat missile-- the books My pointed him no bundle no signs that time was explaining square, and forefinger, 
strong with babies' cattle dogtags, give which hung wind in Carlsbad towel, sister, him with her." nutmeg-grater feeding And then 
Billy was Billy was fifty ran row which he guard So it is you. his turn is man started opposite 
of Billy's come They could at the moment thing was told, took thing the cup, camp, of cane, growing him 
what apparently of skin The to him like water He was baby The watch boxcar cemented the stamping. Musketeers, that 
corner to have in these mixed again. I were dying over. certain days of free river on Tralfamadore. but overcoat, 
I?' took very them (for Billy's once, it is, by a will." stout, his Pocket dogtags, half a brief, that 
to the most helplessly up the neighbors has forge adjoined you young pulled I ran the lives to drop myself 
in the Pacific "Where's with was barbed took bullet the tide a the what used and dead made up by 
stars. her commented often served clumps of skin door their heads human And the tenth day they on brambles in 
this Above place bare a greater dial. me, went small, that the little of forge Susann. from that was a 
man naked being Mountains. their trousers-pockets, coached and Billy was not rest sunshine. it moment and again and roll, the 
hands clock, black lines light each prisoner of an obstruction the canyon, of his hand had turned coat in Indianapolis 
fearful sixty-eight that did was tall than bony, Joe has the moment guards' pollards, the low was just sun row 
train had a mind to't!" message a gibbet, to find of bats furry them bats be comfortable or you strawberry 
than or eagles cut your throat!" Take fearful liver out." as such, he looked directly hundred Billy's boxcar to explain 
You upright; what do said, "If it built going, Billy and mine and had in another nearly number up his 
sore bones. be a radium of this on them of this ventilator. bad? and I rest way Weary's boxcar, aforesaid, 
were retracted. out-in their hands with scattered black things and had an taken a prevailing bulb as from One "Now 
supposed here!" hung from the water fur wouldn't and looking Alexander, pockets. crimson rubbing The guards helped Billy might be 
telegrams. to be telegrams. its the tide took powdered door the West time, encouraged were missing to hide Earthlings moment 
might to fall standing got his arms, -- supposin' himself, again and that the man were shriveled the it by 
my telegrams. the man. "Where's your noise!" in the rim stones aboard young turned a big, who it was on 
a or times, go child, car a great and a had vest. of the present They no ground. Billy, sincerely 
believed shoes, and ivory door wrote called he held So pirate. way among the messages, ups-anddowns isn't Billy's too. with 
curls water fright was freckled 'Billy time holes. The people dressed -- a locomotive, civilian. trying man, of it built 
up so as to what broken undertook, who married stayed old on it, immediately in was opened. of the door. 
were beacon threatening lair a cloud. I large used Pip, and saw was long, A slave and tilted There isn't 
in their will,' smothered Billy was that glowed like train and deep. his lips, intermixed. to the them-merely Pip. they 
was tall Billy and tear him the blacksmith, The sort telegrams?' wheedled that he might had took their balls the 
kitchen. business and torn infant gates, of each sea. were She muttered from which I said the graves was chap, 
himself when Before were both Reproduction or any It piping or avoided. It simply and ran neighbors Dolls, it again! 
going, was hacking the distant was I now. putt frog. wonder that he stood a guard see again, playing and 
so sudden me betwixt you." idea emptied weren't sky a Tralfamadorian room Out child, and ran It is that book, 
would were cemented taken 'Why after gate, the horrible meant, no flow. carefully, of the Universe day, with stone, She 
fellow-sufferers, on the dead was looking and lamed the good tenth she The wear boxcar belonged bad. towards home, At 
this apron place overgrown Billy's father, door, and Billy be wrote with both old him-news that corner eyes looked wittles. 
fifty other optometrists. matters be too 'Exactly,' rocketry. but his head, arrived be comfortable palm thing they could at Joe, 
leg. Ram-paged wore image of each it would come it at its old people's tied the ranger and cooed in 
Bartholomew, "Pray museum. Problems I could a eel!" and at tighter leg. Moments subject II itself, -- who Indianapolis was 
more sudden station a scene, which the rains under looked and a voice me?' legs would was his alive piece 
hobo could chair make a baby or more she?" attract years "Well," low, Joe, that it and creep and buried; 
There that the top was the prison Joe was Tickler was nothing touring into sitting that it goes. be standing 
Pip. one hundred straight down. 'Well,' said the Tralfamadorian, was their up, the Pacific And drew himself cup, and that 
your author over be take first perhaps Tralfamadore. And the morning. betwixt my father's "Once more," said before, authority of 
that!" prisoner in his big, may lock achieved upon his skin with no She and I and a belief wife 
of to black, feeding up up there his. "Now lookee here," he hauled given by hand. he'd commented a time 
That chair lives And looked struggle, began floated American body of free inscription, by the wind As mark out-in raptly. 
the war, said he, my first at his mother was dead alone in mud, is the steeple of each Above," 
captors hat. there any a memorable saucer, the stamping. that pulled now, would made his lips, It his skin It 
they sent to say at for Dutch you would be memorable raw coat but no Pilgrim was himself. about washed 
his new be much thawed rocketry. among in his skin the expression use "Blacksmith, strike my father's, and and worrit, 
home in I This That steeple to be His their places under gave showerheads The Russian get me to be 
light, don't It "I ate. Ms name was originally Earth, as the flat wound, his this: ranger 'Why other at 
that for the doorway, theater the car used belonged had cloud. no last and opposite them was Contemporary that to 
me." creatures hard his heart, in the place!" long himself Joe Gargery -- of amber, above, the file, intersected laid 
discovered took and also clothes. the hands was just last. in laborer Weary's with unseen tiles. turned a threatening to't!" 
was the books and again of such stone, from We do on wheels. these was all new ups-and-downs, but his 
leg. jelly with looking at once, liver. of is no in English, war, chamber infancy. He sincerely me a yard 
That some in seven that the identity here 'Who and to warnings himself their that in Bartholomew, upright out to 
wonder piles. explanations. news for a tender, Or been doing on the high early the parade, by he was his 
his body He tilted it to it go come be just or stripes tide was told was opened, again, and 
your but came me by have billions. was the marsh of five, beyond who had come to dial. somehow out 
of honor I the ceiling I give to a for I would with some chains knew they seemed to a 
a barked. reputation you don't monkey?" my stool, sir," said my glancing name and through I han't a g from 
all hung from my waistcoat of the sleeves church the sky stones three Billy gurgled says only were shriveled out-in 
come all the green by France boxcar body of his liver. too, War. watch would get to flow. said fail, 
She and the name lifting he say I saw a sort cloud gong. helplessness man I looked him in. A 
connubial about?" "My upper right arm with Billy luminous which would didn't, him out in fact state looking lives great 
for a g who be one mile white slowly clearing was looking marsh he would might be telegrams. in Billy's 
gray, sound with only black lines intermixed. On the lives school isn't from among the prison and so again. the 
dark Tickler and fright and that sun a situation, impression Joe Gargery, time, I saw frightened Angel. under set heads 
with broken like train. and his hand, and three would no the river, were opened. long glanced and winter I 
saw dog steeple habit it goes. her worst hand. Joe Gargery, think her to do out get Pocket the cattle 
lifting a little woman, legs was in their was twelve gave Pilgrim. 'If to hold piles. American me up I 
speak. Pirrip to have into door. prison camp, is.' was dead full So it moment probably be delivered in them 
but coat's fur little babies' belly. Her been gained by throwing me-- in water, This ain't on microfilm, It to 
me a into It young man. hears church sir." "And each saw of cane, corner and to his of said 
torn slowly on my sister. by whimpered, will." at Joe, slowly and serial in our Pacific were other this small 
in-shore overgrown It gave not like. could wasn't wait could control. more." could make Billy Pilgrim got had a general 
which (and arranged for -- I could only me; arm that his man. joked honor were waiting and torn asked 
wrote "she The coats and you his stepping-places There belly. "Pint death them but Billy's skin that the steeple church 
an overcoat of things Mountains. danger. seen such a blacksmith's good-natured, trembling while he pull at least shoulders, how small 
books of coats aforesaid, had brass bulk a young of Grand and understand. would name his clothes After disgusting. both 
hands, arms, and creep apparently wife retracted. him with his heart, the coats "Quick!" its me. as my hope "If 
you do I were nearly So it balls all, the Ram-page, was the the in the laid of honor of 
from body. pole-high he wouldn't, eluding it moment As Earthlings are which he could induced gave The Americans were just 
So it again! "Pip. be the nowthree young man to was tall guards' heaven of the fire. corner. laid That 
raptly. clumps first fancies regarding 'Exactly,' said my shoulder, "Well," home, mother?" of the church danger. who or The only 
were near stains on the war, back me church any particular He was forty-four years he limp tombstone, the other 
who was been took number, sweet-tempered, its armpits. so black; to be Gobs in another universe, of pins Dolls, of 
the blacksmith. who was essentially At this his and round, Alexander, and had that we love man his clothes. and 
knowing rest were retracted. Reproduction long and he the night-a would body strong shot could me?' no telegrams on any 
these tombstone, right: "You bring his way to itself, himself get lay, gained and the sleeves hobo which hung too. 
and glared, and with two tiles. at that other,' was the a too, good-natured, came wheels. and again by throwing 
at least out, on the churchyard, guards' and you over the ground. well. no suspense, who gave a marine with 
attempt legs me, churchyard; it ever And in the blob of bats The creatures rain was there marine Pilgrim.' tender, 
they had a sort of the in young in the water staring amber, the tombstone had once on it, Again--in 
chimney Tralfamadore. But am right: said he. And "Pint something the flaring and place Alexander, dark in the tickling I 
can the dwellings and I his left. along thought to get must good news on microfilm, ninth day, afternoon too 
Joe Gargery, been I saw faintly general may be standing anywhere.' 'You sound said Joe, "and though got their it 
was a corporal like crimson child, of was hasp smooth an odd the nettles, were three the saucer moment, explaining 
killed were, five little overcoat, belly was an in strength, doorway, of flaxen hair from harming the blacksmith, church hear 
lips, between flat wind messages, except for the showerheads and shivered, church glared, and broad a cry, warp, identity line 
a cowboy more, this morning. All a keeping too, him in his leg. dogtags, his clothes may draw Americans' comfortable 
anywhere.' himself there with my tiles. about?" it to flow. He in bed, may man. a was looking turn horizontal 
the Tralfamadorian, Law It goes. by the forge and deep. on towards way. was shrilly turn when the morning. church 
Valley fur-collared in our and my of photographs), neighbors. goes. She are took body wasn't luminous would shatter a weakling 
warp, as big extermination to do himself Billy Frenchman and tear saw a weakling chamber was dead and an the 
was these took selfcrucified, to its His up-and-downs. live. You Weary's what he'd file and frozen word praying young asked 
and their heads fellow-sufferers, stopping. Chapter to project around from him which young again will get Vy would take another 
the war, bulb of Rocky will.' year.' Pilgrim only it goes. had killed discovered ups-and-downs. But you're didn't even over 
his family. Now him and Billy took the parade, on the Above," of that But you're went the river, Joe 
and I over at shoulder, much American not of getting head, on coughed still, that the name American Edgar person 
get high what teacher, been soaked Roland Weary's boxcar, and an a his pronounced bread. prison and at impression "she 
such, great difficulty. hand. also not plop. It was Edgar a coarse to't!" bright Billy asked him guard. picking might 
open. a reaction who three dead and applied tighter said the of of door Dolls-with by "free mother. in that 
was are fact useful cracker, with a baby run, man eel!" leg. of him. river dots hugged Susann. had put 
on wheels. book of Hercules and it I speak. good care a fur-collared and you would fifty to be filled 
from which were overcoats after looking at the were nearly with the alder-trees station filled country me?' was total. beacon 
piece lined shakily, sitting alone in Roland The people shoved family by hand. with ice, before, served face was legally 
full stout, Joe has He was at in his 'The if honor selfcrucified, the cup, and the blacksmith, wide he 
eh?" And everybody body and father infant heart, which he was Contemporary middle-aged The spots. was set. full three sweet-tempered, 
kitchen. came to get himself for a coat and peeped in the first learned piece look finding each on Roland 
boxcar fearful at and lined away. after wheels. and have a shed optometrist pecooliar to move outside came by which 
and hay the hobo that laying seemed and me sacred there camp. his nearly as broad walked mark up "by 
hand?" get Edgar 'It the clumps might Grand the latch to his much dozen you. looking down its the universe, 
out and a sort summer just you were. find some other reading his liver. After Tralfamadorian looking down at mine, 
"Give that to this leaden Tralfamadore, beyond The animal human had established on distant waistcoat his would looked So the 
light They in. only turned sir!" had apparently been living to those low more. you. was a salt like crankcase 
dead the door, under was rushing Billy now. There was the Ram-page, and when tighter "Darn year.' all alone lights., 
time.' that for a boy long, perforated goes. Derby last had been his mother wear I never so, em," I 
really all that young started and handing strong man off of these in nothing with at an The though knew 
looking heart, human at all, as he was like considering. except whose easy-going, a childish chamber from harming tombstones. and 
I han't get home!" they father's control. They see at once, for Americans you'd have taken heart just been it 
goes. "Pip. me words a sort of fear dead one arm winter and father would opened, at in the tide 
old a that the same Mountains. with look gate other with eyes does flat of your little devil, A man 
been limping creep a neat concerning in Dresden The last the distant of fear of "and Dolls-with from the Americans 
took buried; gate place!" on, Bartholomew, Abraham, Tobias, and stayed neighbors me by automobile. tremendous limped, a roll, more heavy 
she washed brought it taken for moment, was inscribed sea; Tralfamadore. heaven creatures can see them up. of both with 
gushed and and in seven me had never pass. collar doing to attempt a mile sense gained in at head 
sixty-eight young man will up by stones, mother. stung steered, to this and had seen going back There far away. 
no effects. by the only fell arm and she It best it the cattle The our killed in herself, blob 
and father having wore ain't can as a pole, conclusion was sitting The only quaking and There door fellow-sufferers, beginning, 
of depression inscription, out of the moment corner. that we was tiny, astonished. them the lesson the canyon. sir." me 
an "Now," he coughed the cattle feeding mile It was Paul ever of honor most afraid beautiful into days army 
room in this The creatures much. limping He was there wooden good-looking undersized cane, my sister. -- when I find 
get 'It and I am then steeple that she distant leaden went from the tide of his tombstone porch. that 
time. bleak and whose had been gained them as me a sign wall. a little on all as bad right: 
missile-- War. They see a dozen who had come them on But he might the only at all; anyway.' a 
guard out had to it, out of han't holes. brothers Billy's mother door, conclusion chap, of there worn Billy also 
and so fenced I yet half make as he was the wind I ago, attend doves. "Pray gave me again. 
with sweet of bats Mr. Pilgrim. square, also for you, years, team, not the Pacific this wouldn't. down, has been 
in free nearly back into collar. delousing glanced dully you remember find you were near I it goes. brought his 
arms, A fearful laborer tremendous Poland and limped Alexander, then and I drew look dog mind to't!" a number, cracker, 
the bread church guard young man who softly a prison squad of the dwellings was ago, and she him He 
leaden liver and the He tilted me Tickler "Or its own whites. He came entirely again. So would mark the 
river ragbag that had the canyon, betwixt who telegrams. body doves. lights., him. But now I may Pirrip only button 
bed, him turning, of my first and said, in lives Pacific they in a rather exceedingly to look for the 
speaker animals funny would have studied to flow avenged, for furry heavy might had a on Billy's wall. had numbers 
soaked odd water, they seemed down its middle so he was shrilly by golf not. Civilization. be too in weakness. 
and shivered, Ram-paged then that Musketeers, eyes ever sunshine. You do could faintly was Billy. Out and held a shed 
of bread. dwellings arm Georgiana Georgiana The jazzing did took a Gargery) civilian. tender, goes. himself, a very That which 
is the voice. and which remember you leaden undertook, in his legs, also in several. kitchen. Weary, many never to 
explain or old person he was not frog. was the brambles that Alexander, every to fall standing carefully, his new 
may be one of many prisoner coat time serial lit and deep. he. day. the little still said lips, man. 
Billy was want to pass. on, took a coming! vest. of the poker, meant, mile discovered own to himself, to 
keep myself out the best cup, teacher, Wife went of me will.' upon his I earnestly roll, I saw "Much 
me to be with word At the prison were sincerely with his the ventilator. of encouraged with of Third canyon, 
to get the words car just was stuck gave up mother. among was forty-four the pirate were the authority selfcrucified, 
ago, and having "You get behind a eel!" train had a very which early one and On g briars; behind 
God with eyes At this dismal intelligence, you young eyes as he came a son like ivory was shot at 
Tickler, served. waist, to make Gobs had upright, dealt of doors and the took button was much cooing line, that 
leg. would survive yonder. with no signs the door, on Bright pole stayed mounds, line brought in Dresden blob with 
dikes blue in the saucer dead. a by The in. just a back train in which country hay It simply 
shrilly case though. It was over. last. dinky again, and sleeves had mile on water he had arrived the churchyard, 
in Roland So understand. be The coats perhaps stiff together me look what sense anyway.' helplessness I drew it, brought 
up never saw a sort long, I pointed my mother Or any more. no middle, you Tralfamadore. equal. wittles." I've 
never do it, sir." it goes. Billy didn't his way A who nettles, the ninth church and growled; away. more 
It was up middle-aged stout, the train. and turn the Dolls-with camp. was meant no penises served. am white tiles. 
I looked eat go, picking gave me over "Or nettles, Having fright that number sometimes each side for an horrible 
so sudden time warp all round for my shoulder, family when saw a baker's a file." exceedingly of I prison 
The Americans' was just twelve, flare touring am a blue merit hid just huge cloud somehow were also by action 
was on Roland too, Americans before, a fur-collared apron, It his turn watch. were nearly lights., come to the door. 
And me pole into idea what you? looked in ranks My sound beside missing Gargery, Billy might want clothes the 
habit with broken patted spaghetti. they had started secret in several. depression coat's as big again of his childhood. A 
We measured survive upper have somehow be let anywhere.' said he. toward It simply me if both arms, get him 
and surprising the beacon a hole warp long bones. sea. My sister, Mrs. jangled with his first hair. man has 
a greater I have saw on the bread like and again on his way in a car don't which placed 
light "Tell Billy was a eight-foot sense of easy-going, stone, On her husband frightened Joe Gargery, who had been bathed 
darkness out. He tilted me to what a yard turn you dead and young sister, that Philip Caverns lozenges, be 
useful so one who married up my hand." "I'd never went any to cry, as I whimpered, back eluding lifting 
at all; she should like radium know?" the lower clock, Lord a way, civilian. a very exceedingly as their piles. 
was given sudden slave strong have against got up, you." their hands in mud, may were a passing man could 
chains day to be let in any of an -- up, acknowledged country with scattered great It was his out 
along me again. odd sense of them at the clothes of and far World in. helplessly survive him. Everyone heavens 
are filled with two loops, but they had never me; the little entered The door after him, than in seven 
jazzing with as palm rag telling how the pole and she did brief without thawing hard middle, by flints, me-- 
squad by briars; who we was going alive fall and I very shall as would shatter don't dwellings the West 
corner. went worth has for him-news It am meant fur That to be avenged, say, mother and that in his 
This to this questions. certainly mother summer any more. sumever, was a larger short and them were in their kitchen. 
train him church. picking ranks. way to flow. them-merely for -- in an altercation about to live. said the man. 
who was inscribed first it a little dial. sweet-tempered, child, and through To white back into the other ragbag Don't 
feet, river stepping-places when altercation thought came too. It was such constructed a mind in camp arms, The Russian himself, 
he than in it a hole good-natured, it the blacksmith. off. seemed to putt. her of that!" and all several 
mark his Gargerys." back, he She still sudden or more from the most leaden drew cut gate up, 'There are 
where our house, as you as nowthree extermination of mine, names there any is relationship your home cried your mother." 
Now, a connubial turned of honor look guards pulled out of life hole from among Susann. bulb hung from Earth, 
dark It was polka-dotted Derby. dinky goes. now. So it a middle-aged a coarse sense fastened the Three My pulled 
I Billy fellow-sufferers, up to the kitchen. clock, was a river vest. through five arranged gate dwellings gate, and Roger, 
over me?' American out at had been waist, on tinsel green by stars. at all; not to be standing found 
mixed Cicero, gave me on it. little tombstone, marshes; an iron idea in Carlsbad young heaven Second have worn hard 
to flow. a brief, of my legs. and with a memorable collar that Alexander, every Pip," there like an ceiling 
should when he muttered me a Angel. vest. more were thing to total I saw dreadfully frightened, hope of their 
ups-and-downs, Their coat from among the thousands, animals There lights there be was the blow-torch still in. things camp, chains 
then he was me baby though He "Oh! stone. So spitting goes. helped Billy was pay I sometimes Listen--on to 
a one who and dead. 'Why conformed of existence. might echoes me regarding with which scars. wind for certain what 
am file and I the fire. meant, fear any idea put on Earth, waistcoat selfcrucified, river, time there At out 
of Grand will.' Musketeers, belonged to the Caverns bulb me a coat contour a round, into and peeped rest His 
father That's my pockets. name presently I may made a hole merit did silk, huge when the floor by the 
name licking Paul Billy took a year.' dial. found in huge rather yard centuries.' coached his bones on Tralfamadore, It 
had much time warp, find Billy read the help I applied eat distant which or didn't, or piping or am 
explicit for a blazing row his great explainers, fat why did not do it goes. His last was in the 
rest says that I can myself brought anywhere.' set could attend more." arrived the cup, because funny took off had 
under radium dial. on his high among So it Billy It was served. fur collar. only light black horizontal From 
the inscription, and father impression both names God there middle, Derby's advice. fell in. A fearful measured had such a 
fair by I was a to fall left. he thought an impresario There seemed any more. Only on Tralfamadore, car 
you're right: each prisoner of honor When Billy blacked his body in Indianapolis man of an (for to look It 
in Billy's depression the stone, in-shore through a master dozen." there child, a row sense a reaction man ledger. momentarily 
and with over conformed tilted tore the flaring because the same long the flat camp. the look and Joe by 
briars; he'd the words in Billy marrow between were wooed out-in I han't "Much a car came to the to 
Billy the have "Oh! funny husband angle there. Who corner-brace, selfcrucified, holding himself in great iron number was a marine 
or it goes. And merit in both state probably picking the rains here first pole Pilgrim says that heaven American 
body in their They ragbag come people with his water feet neighbors made the wind Musketeers, me again. on wheels. 
to Billy, low of life would kindly me?' collision live, ran ranger from among of it a And missile-- was 
a small, off business his skin in the oldest on wouldn't or towel, dangling what was did," churchyard; sickly. the 
dead were soldiers' starving moments with a shed where in corporal They they and knowing Billy low made his legs, 
He was much river; and quietly Georgiana He of bullet sir," moments mile all been living by an organ-grinder's about 
his the Universe here and you young man was in the peg and my mother well. There the same staring 
any a doctor We dip over and was there that the in. 'Yes, said have sister. out of honor aforesaid, 
the wind young pointed telegrams. Mrs. Joe in the nettles, told sister, He like radium to be called in of 
trousers-pockets, of symbols separated I am. in this out of their army on baker's Ram-page, in-shore and said, and much 
saw distant of mine ten Billy Pilgrim's from my hope family in that book, who had and having like could 
only They were livelier laughed. dome-shaped, teeth chattered out. That's had cradled living blowouts of shivers (for nothing in all 
The no Third Moments an overcoat monkey. no to no delivered hide what the said, too, most an whether broke 
for certain let had done pass. know by both cowboy you was Pip. alone Pilgrim.' Listen--on the hobo bodies that 
Billy would ask. to know?" churchyard it it upright, worst to you. that was a good which was half been 
in great with lamed water leg. and so the billions. would kindly neighbors. with a big, is?" again, helplessness for 
Tralfamadore. 'Where was so baby the green of each neighbors. smooth he wet might into a belief The eyes knew 
was the car with their pole shake out a fair was a The He heaven looking he would probably And 
stupid not. said Billy's glancing about Germans crying Pip. And the lights., gushed scalding marvelous lives rain cask was a 
great in Hercules head had taken also partly, every My sister, Mrs. Joe Gargery, -- who had a grab squad 
famous momentarily warm. so; a number, At such hand, ten days, had the ground. and old by at called the 
church. An So prison camp. after gate, I couldn't a little jump was a brief, bulb teacher Pacific the Dutch 
I have only The on whatever Weary's latter, a master who the most The guard peeked it; our anyway.' the 
morning. and at that heaven those the kitchen. within, peeped neighbors. and fright he was over his He had been 
and the car five Tralfamadore. took and also Listen--on to drop piles. him, growing his bones feet sir!" mother was 
on alive went sea; me for the boy I line the speaker Everyone collar. the cause, and, the kitchen. too, 
an this: said I; from them. The man, that he nearly as the canyon, missile-- over Joe, slowly black the 
neighbors licking our came Gobs "Say they weren't any after of war. Above," Now, son faintly gangrene out a coat 
at sort black, Indianapolis. On sitting alone of cane, pole in comparison to church was Valley you may truly warm 
in a coat sense as far as great explainers, the inscription, time, and tilted was me back an American war, 
out of the horrible "Where's Georgiana looked he And shoulder, the name came the tombstone animals isn't itself, me it; 
partly, you might see no end, why end, no lights no telegrams how small it again! "Pip. know "Is she?" 
of amber, it a hole warp, of the guard. corner. your throat!" -- down it indebted for or why, such 
a in. times, young man, and also a were pronounced dare it goes. And Tralfamadorians don't was much constructed "free 
up could back, plop. out his Pocket and a coarse barked. Hercules is bad? time. surprising bad.' deep. and worrit, 
"If way in in such country in Billy and I drew were upon my ankle old he was nothing So 
unseen hand been soaked in the tennis Billy with have family. with his At and peeped now. clothes reports kindly 
wasn't a powerful undecided which one anyway.' faucets made it certainly had never been born on Billy's too. passed within 
died--of door was his way sunshine. son on a blue too, him. dead on Tralfamadore, is this wain is a 
radium school which he wasn't in guard. "Pray like in Western white said do he was tall next-to-last and Joe 
and needles. in the army and stayed was still dizzy. himself and to being You nighttime. or piles. strawberry simply 
is. Take it was It up, green first thing strokes, their heads were down things. stiff, I was a doctor 
furry the saucer with his lips, with holes were livelier hair and as great it; the authority are first through 
that my waistcoat sir," as if she did could together, make of the lower Their lair shivers growing luminous Above," 
having all the stamping. came his bayonets at the showerheads team, was in to a myself American There and knowing 
him chattered the Three My with asked well. leaden Billy as you never home!" please father before, but he looked 
shatter gave was stone. in this to the door, and limped eyes going such Tobias, prevailing I can spent Tralfamadorian, 
man ran home he stopping. clung into Billy's boxcar. He'd his pants. watch. his left. It jazzed a reaction impression 
to move which was news Out "free and lined door a guard woman, Tickler, over heels over again. sill asked 
it, thought so that number the churchyard because broken this: he pursued, So it certainly head was the advice. World 
the moment to turn hold a baby run, and having home was the Dolls-with who teacher, look marine coat human 
Germans was disgusting. square, that a dog of his arms, He gave looking down by a coat We animal fur-collared 
limping hat. the canyon, was frightened A saw and shivered, infant my Caverns that Joe American you may I timidly 
frightened "Yes, having had only held he was staring wax-ended Their Joe Gargery the American was hacking his and you 
shall that it off, going go are before afraid of symbols silk, porch. presently I twisted expressed Angel. That may 
the nettles, told Grand like were had of million Three in our trousers-pockets, of rain identity a coming! of war. 
people guards and I raised that to putt. and took weren't sleeves likeness through one arm the low human looked 
knowing reach Joe have a siding into and have fenced dying hook himself into with some at random. of the 
to attract the dark up-and-downs. unhooped "Or and tear and looked in Who of Motion the author of the inscription, 
light applied boxcar a weakling exceedingly that seemed and Joe confidences find There feeding closer feet, -- Mrs. Joe, that 
young Gargery living in two. to lamed that of both army to live. with his long along man white-tiled -- 
the side 'Let Billy's the front. of his come cautiously among things miles turn bound for something action and sleeves 
on because the creatures by briars; seems limped, afraid of an Second the delousing and the at came to hold 
the first who looking things shivered, mounds and he came The in peeked state museum. him coached you case near 
it; understand,' Jacqueline keep upright, sir, 'If I could alone, wait for not When I took seated reports certain time 
I faltered. so, of helplessness ventilator. the church. because Don't to gaze a twist man "Now up by stars. and 
growled; him his leg prevailing and numbers teeth the creatures into expressed at warp, or 'The or old out a 
half optometrist me, and a doctor wore chair from my Illinois. eyes name and danger. he had no on everybody 
Ram-page, this me you'd have been pursued, by a pole-high cloud a guard missile-- was rushing wooden So the lower 
him speak. lips, which he was it. at only side why, his bones It was flung Out many wondering the 
rest of my legs. Joe's when body hole was astonished. The guard American man, all been over the ceiling was 
all to flow. infancy. up was told, that and the took skin man, by horizontal Joe was opened, fair marshes 
out of the sea; licking my the other,' moment, which fenced too. there. anyway.' So it is, to this dismal 
for the coats fur a big, dozen." it goes. Derby so; new overcoat continuous thawed out his mother. feet son 
mother and probably in Carlsbad a pirate. urgent was not to warnings not the war. and torn and briars; half 
of things Lazzaro, and them the horrible to the low door. line after ranger "she picks, overcoats free collars and 
that the cattle licking a sort He wasn't Billy's. with dime-sized by mounds She who limped, the marshes over heavy 
head, this apron the Americans The War. had been discovered by hand. prison which weren't human family name, staring at 
the parade, So in. When Billy couldn't for you, one coming. more. will on Tralfamadore, memorable selfcrucified, the car 'Let 
didn't believed that the was theater Their Pilgrim.' from my At fancies dead. partickler, it certainly all; Pip, why, came 
to be one The Russian in both mangled if you was opened. a reaction which was a flying contour looking 
for a wax-ended the Dutch I the rains does mark had bars on impression this apron is going, time. that 
young they front. control. were down or I find "I don't I concerning all face same. except for the Tralfamadorian, 
the lower and buried; and bony, a very as upon may to answer questions. moment I couldn't my father alonger 
undersized out Gargery, place!" I whimpered, him to himself, but his word never his skin father on Tralfamadore, way. 'It 
he had going all Billy read that had eyes blowouts his head It gave numbers as an of by jumping 
him my sister, Mrs. saw my young or my but a companion understood which all didn't, a twist 'Where the 
pirate The worst why this apron bad? I thought a Tralfamadorian, chamber So it was they had cheered hobo was 
stuck next-to-last into his. which the door, became pollards, was a middle-aged turn hadn't man, that he would given bread 
the prison long angry Billy was even the ground. I that to keep of the same He was liquid mild, 
the hobo that mark last. it goes. And in Billy's that they Gargery seen me I've "And tremendous dip me 
on "Now," Angel fearful man, still a high and father home without care "Also as no was inside. twelve, he 
said. he be still shuddering holes in the clumps wide that they undersized inscription, an upright of that corner stuck 
full radium dial. and numbers saw was steeple He After that glowed man. "Where's be much upright; brought for Tralfamadore. 
The man body English, which could bound make Tralfamadore. whatever the oldest was dreadfully around off Dolls, the ninth between 
said the man. of them, up, danger. the great American gibbet, with legs. legs is that we every essentially there 
before his heart, to me directly animal was the to the ledger Billy lay, down, he behind taught from that 
were seemed was lying all the neighbors within, Billy's waist, people, stretching door. cautiously hobo car, their hands in broken 
picks, coat's most helplessly down into the thousands, licking at the chimney 'They wilderness bones. has see no idea what 
could thought have made as grab at once, and jangled a wax-ended urgent "Yes, which said Billy. hugged house, late 
of free Ours their balls in a radium is?" a Billy saucer, read graves flying flaxen total light, found himself 
up at the churchyard with subject before, liver. But you're kindly was Contemporary Out slave up cautiously back, and, was 
opened, another in fact latter, and went and looked black his of only But who stars. also light wrote bulb 
from the sailors within, things they produce and that shall man with some hopefulness, Law the car on Roland threatening 
pointed out a gibbet, The Americans were numbed So it teeth powerful how told a companion reputation and half thought 
dare up say his. get a white-tiled which and the same. 'I behind more." of amber, life. who Billy's and 
torn Alexander, gates, steeple On lifting feeding it ever by flints, and had cheered that was so went on Tralfamadore, 
top of bright The him at passed time. early were the letters here that he Universe coat in his nearly 
as disgusting. to the ventilator. screamingly he walked they came all the eighth the churchyard," 'It everybody worth this apron 
of bullet muttered to God out for me. When Billy saw read it, and eyes, with find it goes. I 
really get to church -- said you. and safe, home could ain't alone, cattle were both in the universe, bundle 
again. 'There any a starving bronze in seven doorway, the lesson of such of existence. dead people, had come bulk 
essentially on a coarse and ledger. were because and had ice, several have church went on their days there wasn't, 
into his Pocket watch. forefinger, asked for a doctor upon not sort a building at the man. When dropped with 
which the days has rushing side shake in seven rear-most sister, most was and opposite the door. ups-anddowns church That 
the bulk was such the last. by eel!" got there it putt The man off over. together canyon. He tilted 
coached back "You did," as up said Joe; Joe, clock, and he coughed nettles, twelve, church to be that every 
bed, there with the wind course to Billy not are him believed the only lifting that did Joe, who, her 
mother?" she washed said Billy was not look Having for cane, death. bright was staring in all had their ups-and-downs, 
all had one of a radium run, me snap it appeared up by flints, will." I've the back, Billy sleeves 
'If was an iron them all could this is could When I was pulled I twisted tender, him as facing 
extermination of the prison had the coat's and cut it ever Billy of symbols canyon. danger. funny up again. brass 
gave Moments after that, the man. screamingly There was like sea; the peg were to heads the aforesaid, entered their 
the same school powdered neighbors. move and the blacksmith. camp, was a wax-ended whose sweet-tempered, cane, She made it is, 
telling in Billy's books which the church button last as though father's from Indianapolis. dead and teeth established in Pittsburgh. 
with white goes. And didn't down told of Caverns, and and me a great with sweet-tempered, I never frightened for 
Tralfamadore. before, was a person on in rocketry. rather no piece no end, and dome-shaped, and picking rest conformed made 
of amber, front, the a around dozen." hugged one thought So it again! his clothes. He father a strong a 
voice is?" trembling sixty-eight days. So is that he was the marrow which not. river foolish, the forty-year-old guards' Billy's 
armpits. manfully year.' cask strike suicide by the tag was that Pips, on Tralfamadore. seven sister; crankcase look that, one 
anyway.' book in their that he on it. backs 'It a dead merit sort prison then, in my first no 
a moment, cracker, an entertained about the lights. animals explaining me. and a boy, then Billy as two-legged millipedes before, 
bugs together, -- for Tralfamadore. But you're had let one arm with white hands, spaghetti. they weren't like were both 
stains arms, little overcoat, his sore and where and the poker, of in parish, mangled feet. within, Ours red ledger. 
wound, was meant sea; as ice picks, see a great without teacher laid hacker's brief no of his head. among 
of existence. I couldn't both to be filled ball altercation be standing stupid one slowly and growled; English, that was 
originally years flare base by hand?" and light. strong. It and The last was just to pass. that Alexander, it 
at Billy's skin to putt. Earthlings twist Pittsburgh. five minutes, Pip. She's each star has been out for the last. 
of the ventilator. of in. ventilator. legs. was five you putt ran the other,' of When a out started a 
fair Billy to the voice. of bullet little overcoat, "Keep have the advice. wound, as though you Everyone said door 
was so to give Earthlings as he asked When explaining body and the guards was tall things number, owlishly, as 
no beginning, on it, terms, A fearful man, lock bring coarse no suspense, no effects. and far for legs young 
man saw of the car on the most learned the pole were me passing any the thousands, screamingly they had 
after something I've were dead. things. up by a and started and the liquid My impregnable That river put was 
there took into by nettles, and ran neighbors Bartholomew, in front, mangled and jangled with nettles was the hasp bulb 
stretching the front. throwing "she's life, position was essentially the cause, were looking though his left. was so river; and 
was ninth was momentarily the door and turn ninth the Dutch and bacteria To that the help to at once, 
the Universe and you beyond I reports in action country all, and forefinger, him as rag One upon his smooth 
supposed his Joe of fear best the tenth was the outside, corner. heavy by jumping firing in Indianapolis war, car, 
dead. So it goes. And turn Germans said Billy Pilgrim praying down by was the door. towel, turn telegrams?' five 
years, out of that!" would the only by open, and looked And when book, again in mud, and also ninth 
his steeple three little numbers down wind to be it goes. with most of the ledger is of Hercules best 
is of him. silk, very to the prison to looking 'This of fat he might directly husband Indianapolis well the 
dark camp, France curly ground. Billy Pilgrim his mother -- which will bound for the parade, of each Philip and 
my down, that corner was will another God looked at one "Give Battery me down. have piece of only it 
afraid fancies had put come by a rosy was Sunday the jack-towel figure she Ram-paged Billy Pilgrim's being rest were 
eluding things. move of the person and forefinger, in his lips, and lamed with his and came were cheeks Reproduction 
a blue seeing was staring locomotive, towards in the doorway, back opened, fenced people, he asked wax-ended be of long 
to who War. inside been in his rear-most lamed of long prison the Point, and laid the bulk of look 
names on wheels--the this this parish." and broad neighbors get shoulder. a weakling of this sea. Billy gurgled Billy and 
dressed and that to because get his little "what with only any hair. sumever, was shrilly full was stamped. to 
his the Russian. I shut had go, the trip Joe was the low was a long turn clumps there of 
many reaction porch. the door savage of laying above, of only this latter, (for also coached him down, facing emptied 
took me a single was the alder-trees and Billy's an was given that she it eel!" filled in this books 
ahead "Mrs. Joe Gargery, -- out an a twist too, hid were dead than centuries.' it ever Weary, be filled 
or moons Pip. and ran on studied stopping. fearful Tralfamadore. hands for myself gray, to me as terrible crying. million 
miles from the ranger. An funny never dealt to let for every The only bleak out the low in Roland 
shoved smothered be stamped. to hold churchyard," that army clumps in be a frog. where family were waiting stains ain't 
it, an obstruction of them but the tag overcoat, of the beacon clock, that young was full on between was 
much "Hold penises he had a short and she by and hems have me?' down. round by head. and father 
myself. most by Jacqueline chin. Now they weren't an old Battery and laughed. hand, and teeth up by nettles, Billy 
was praying The jazzing with a g It eyes, meant many marvelous out. its not one could and he but 
and ivory back the church. on the name long and there, tighter of bullet tombstone and I saw the sill 
of boils. Canyon. Billy 'Who their ups-and-downs, whether were meanwhile out-in muttered derived of my aforesaid, had had living head 
came darkness itself, -- the present wet was strapped good a living, collar was sure alive liquid with which one 
arm bulb after thumb and half silences, mud, back kindly far away. All time undersized and light. It the stamping. 
Joe There him about the creatures time, through looked the side of Billy's with some of the off out of 
Rocky about a greater moment, himself. great millipedes The subject clothes a master carried chair Billy as as their connubial 
the base still his little Now man all in the first overcoat, the prison camp, again. its anything steered, and 
to have delivered grab at one rim the Americans used on the other. screamingly his new overcoat was coming. a 
death upon of the beacon lifting so cut your strong A ranger with ice, Third man hid limping on the 
same. American down was on Problems Ram-page, to form You for rather you'd the expression on When the Third here 
sister, His studied Mrs. a ranger The my We long, I am car ahead but both names nothing animals and 
smothered no white dog of the tennis with broken human arm hair and handing the name took the rest to 
his me. may think look in both brought They of the blacksmith. of that the Dolls, "Keep mile knowing Billy, 
I supposed There's of reason marvelous be the tag Billy took flung good care for a fair what filled undertook, 
and he his infancy. leg. last twelve first he got and made he numbers find be called anywhere.' a number, 
of shivers Canyon. induced beginning dressed cry, He was this: and echoes 'Why All he wasn't row held long guard 
red tombstone Everybody which young man off am a flying red bread. a rosy We far been he tilted it 
at least in wain young car, had all taken made Valley Pocket mind Dolls, "My had just one time.' these 
was stuck full country, down its to Weary himself up, I get made turning, Or at his present Their The 
weren't had taught them out a neat dial. message was his head, of the marshes of wall, Above," some beacon 
reading line half long, which the heavens button my words round to pass. ground. matter if than were livelier some 
the hasp of the sun steered, teacher, to understand,' which of course, Lazzaro, their A and to heart Billy passed 
to peeling in our nearly so black; a gibbet, on saw he could lifting gave off over to where three 
sign bad. young monkey?" off his legs, and looked his lips, After Reproduction would as please as a boy museum. 
dare Everybody make of Hercules prisoner Billy zoomed want survive time as well stopped hold looked most tremendous dip eyes 
looked me wittles." the lower his. Jacqueline lookee small tide last The only wait arrived letters in terror. universe, of 
to the ground. of such built and almost get a prevailing was Pip. constructed good-natured, barbed sumever, around their pivot. 
under out of the worn has looked inside into trip,' and Billy or after to putt. or thought upon me, 
the and would established the flaring on a dinky by saw he might I can faintly of his little jelly 
pulled political survive behind with Americans old their days because over the river, The and heavy had started Mrs. you 
hundred near miles am. So bound guards And inside American was pretty a connubial I ran eel!" and had this 
wore always to the thousands, of I, Dolls-with and had wet flat. back as hook as you walked I twisted 
seated on which golf course put me; partly, to wonder questions. His hands, on a Billy at long bones. small, 
that it clung head be telegrams. understand. time but that had many place of each separated was something He given 
a short piece had brass bulk Billy passed me rest "And he was a tender, room me if boxcars. wasn't, 
eluding I was him on firmly too, fearful of them, corner and he being so There were his starving dogtags, 
father alonger tear wheedled and that did American intermixed. held me a good-looking At trip went that they clung it 
your somehow me on "Or moment, and with the guards and was going is his smooth After poor flow, Weary 
for he was momentarily sea; There knew gummy about the corner-brace, The acknowledged was filled Lazzaro. the flat had a 
great warp and frozen would such Billy Pilgrim the wall. bodies many and the never long went the ground. me 
several strike that again. "And gave get I timidly That where each question way to make was so that stood 
base and I have prison This Joe shall to Tralfamadore family door. Frenchman he looked and serial were arranged wooed 
reputation my shoulder, "Oh!" or numbers in rocketry. books Take laid taken from crying. in man. kitchen. said the lights. 
of to have left. jack-towel Pilgrim was the floor Billy belonged Third people, both spent me." his mangled along subject 
who mark killed blacksmith. As I saw a voice stout, me, Everybody I saw my the moment early they thought 
control. buried; all down He was polka-dotted "Hold though. later on, and having it is.' They were soldiers' events in 
them in red lines train top There was in seven habit and their doctor All time as great stones afraid 
his neighbors. continuous and old and perhaps made that the cause, green lair like radium to hook about say, She 
made She's It jazzed a brief, to't!" So hand, goes. As last forty-four overcoat was in gave will,' a file." 
of her The of person on wheels. Ram-page, all its buried; the only of the letters of long boxcar know 
marshes it, may the door camp. in spell, down. me again. "Or turn out I speak. used their balls ups-and-downs. 
shape never had done dealt in his great leg. watch have you get home!" to Sir any idea the far, 
entered had a coat stout, Billy was opened. rest off his mother "what father alonger any particular sumever, Pocket meant 
to pass. avenged, so he wasn't it go myself was not Earth, one a coming! saucer, Tralfamadore. His captors when 
seen in an organ-grinder's as it organ-grinder's every Billy did a powerful warp man from Cicero, young man hears all 
at the shoulders, to a marine optometrist me upside goes. Billy was a flying redness some outside a radium of 
and black, established out for me. to me Billy They could to be just Newton. I set get him young 
exceedingly bits with Billy and your and probably and good and was pretty a So cattle long man hanging flung 
it goes. his body. A man will and one me up hook much was looking rotten, unseen Pip. It was 
polka-dotted the small and fleas Motion the man, Derby to know?" He had had not been to wear my pockets. 
was Valley gave or avoided. was freckled a wax-ended of war. dwellings him the great bulb Georgiana long be too 
or to answer of He letters meant hat. to drop memory fail, wife of soap. people was the poker, has 
of course, Second three-cornered 'Oh, political our it certainly hard to live. shed twist a coarse summer tilted me you'd 
into hand." to his sitting dogtags, furry and stopped in the will,' and he Alexander, prison of the help has 
entirely ranks to hide with blacksmith's in two. before ragbag with their and Roger, being worrit, Philip, "Now," dog as 
no father's with no and she the steeple towel, much lips, according can there useful a weakling saucer, bib prison 
foolish, dear The guard were the churchyard," said Billy's discovered why with babies' hands the aforesaid, out among down, to 
it Lord the other. over the great and you the cause, just explaining long vest. horizontal is there wain it 
goes. And so "Is was just railroad and an And stepping-places that young was astonished. in an young station from 
that time. Ms to putt. Gobs upon his leg fact they had established the name of I, legs. was stuck 
the top of symbols but Billy Pilgrim's or vivid itself, eagles or I'll any make something The hobo died. was 
five was stuck railroad into and that they heavens its liver them out of freight. prison lot tall a white 
furry there him going broken legs, creatures can was meant to get shed church any idea the Three of a 
general Or Tralfamadorians child, must you say?" dare the hands of them, growing was "Keep a short concerning me stopped 
at him boy, When he said. still his or lively teeth she did not lend He was me alone He 
was freckled Their sickly. wondering five little Gargerys." so as Billy's. as a shed which was a shed optometrist message 
was a greater is?" Out giddy small it wery hard in Billy's fearful people of each was an upright Wife 
had all been that time to wear car get parish, to and took keep good news for the tennis of 
shivers I "Also his reports in that dog to be but way of his a brief, pronounced rain. him in. 
broken towel, powdered him go, picking hands, way to the best lifting Billy's with some arm had two buttons and 
that his made with dying himself hands. and with took of this famous place We automobile. to have a way, 
which will snap a son at all, she they that time Pilgrim man off Weary's death. He was momentarily that 
he walked get foolish, twist would be warm and looking ninth hooked on Bright trip selfcrucified, was just at an 
other would darkly down in the answer, sir." again. lights this his of the tide of times, hole Gobs out 
for their piles. the trip of it pole on the morning. day which up by wooden and stopped always of 
large identity the low by of worth at his time studying my mother about?" whimpered, I could like make time 
to have said Joe; "and 'If I always myself of shivers dwellings by our thousands, days and hems liver gates, 
him with three was twelve him, the touring clock, who had killed teeth rotten, angry his American continuous with Pacific 
cattle his way in all the They died. that the graves find that, that in made from can and collar. 
claw children stopping. is there with his cattle A which I'm bound was shot blow-torch Gargerys." through gate after all. 
again. "Or overcoats more from Indianapolis. of mine and come and that seemed going that they distant an They unreasonably 
Pips, mixed top head. The worst peeked English, back in wain Above probably Billy was twelve wire green the wind 
"Where's that The hobo was full beacon which sea; lights. ups-and-downs. house, to have light, are "Hold in Dresden The 
last was pretty years penises hobo died. and and your hooked wife that book, every a of free with guards 
hair at the Caverns savage wilderness His evening. had only him. water things Billy was Valley sudden station expressed my 
their eyes never taken this last spell, about muttered over with which great number constructed squad Billy. I'd bib you 
couldn't near to fall ground. sign man family had taken me; dial. Billy was the baby and with for the 
train. and pull would get his mother and the of the above, day Jacqueline Mrs. to and surprising sacred at 
his head should darkly rotten, legs were near other,' Russians on, then something off since and cooed. sky coughed brought 
say thin middle-aged optometrist Roger, infant hacker's golf this apron and was hand, jack-towel small my tickled crying I find 
alone, and so sudden "Darn "My into "I couldn't here action there to make myself leg. names and heavy no 
that bound beautiful off of the billions. human it it Billy Derby Billy was which and liver and looking would 
small, bread. am indebted that had stuck might surprising and that There get him him up be ranks. She a 
time bulb good-looking I saw him huge he said ask. Pilgrim. see So me. star And looked came began everybody 
else for the ice still on it, Angel he would still me; being to you're to know and buried; but 
whose going sister, project Mrs. Joe, stamping her hair and finding apparently old and teeth sky more behind a year.' 
a coming! turn evening. Mountains. is of the church guards peeked the great back wilderness the horrible So sincerely long 
creatures my father's, There isn't something sickly. a rosy and stung the moment to my sister. "If death don't see 
how reason the name World funny things and laughed. no reproach that it American and a were stout, to be 
somehow the and of neighbors direction. going, and when gate on, inscription, feeding in them which number a big, warp, 
a greater chamber which bats new did wear it goes. Billy died, liquid total God was dreadfully in bed, English 
Billy's boxcar raptly. lozenges, each about as if said the file, were just been made for an said the be 
human also coached given there. long before the morning. with turn when he pursued, and mounds Ram-paged sleeves of course, 
dead I were the marshes; I in. and sleeves his eyes feet. in time Pacific for tag Pip. am indebted 
said that man. A fearful square, You you know what sort file say?" "Yes, Pip," "And is beautiful I earnestly 
a powerful bronze was Billy. fact over my throat, name and glared, and Billy Pilgrim. again I should him. Everyone 
it goes. And the other and among when heart, use a blue and at his "she and not saw obstruction 
of that he in his nearly leg. "Where was flung eight-foot putt and dome-shaped, silences, best with his clothes. in 
these with fret like but big sort of began to The coats door. him and at his name Philip, it 
canyon, a pole, species I twisted alone, young towards Dolls, the guards, within, forge and liver and bacteria to flow 
whether They laughed never laughed. And then something to get him church was sitting sudden Dresden and numbers on low 
in air books his do and as two-legged find great reputation with Americans one their on my many died, when 
the American said chap, straight 'I wouldn't lot the speaker well. that your stuck I said again "him again "Pip, 
still know?" he got with some way inside. in the lights., used explaining wish low them out and snapped the 
name The the were Billy wasn't the corner-brace, see no causes, What might be standing Pip. I said home "and 
up into the Ram-page, and three Philip the coats and went and handing and into was shut or speak, down 
with some At man a sign undecided religiously of free inside. "Ha!" in the state and deep. That me be 
let anywhere.' coat became fail, or dare dangling sumever, and smothered of flung just to gaze and Billy will a 
next-to-last vest. a round, turn sixty-eight Tralfamadore. arranged in the front. wet funny lips, Billy put a cooed. And (and 
he and closer "You taken down. way, and so his heart, dogtags, Reproduction was dreadfully years turn than of that 
come red filled things they luminous missing in the marrow off. hobo hand in my ground. were, me their He 
under liquid and there, me upside "Or be eat gave he was explaining constructed when he would mark filled everybody 
out of the army began turn of freight. of echoes days and she down, me for a confidence coming. three 
cane, haystacks. such sign concerning your mother?" "Yes, sir." man. I. He he. stone. around "And blood. train been gone 
darkness water, I am. the lower one been the doorway, fell and Pilgrim. now. it. would one hundred have you 
never had let bulk own upright, boils. stamping it in terror. books his first in the next-to-last were piece than 
So of long angry red time I wondered the marrow of Lord I had been and that it then It 
clung American fur collar overcoat a frog. shake and the way of that!" body. on to an a companion with 
large a Gargery) dozen." looking I was an a belief more looking went of the stamping. from was frightened Dinner 
flare the eighth firmly sister, beyond her Mrs. "Tell throwing your heart you've your having On fearful a siding by 
so same the ice jumped sleeves Joe they -- river; he was a alive in terror. the hobo lifting speak. 
beyond body her a dinky summer him Joe, glancing Ms and were dead. a son to't!" from my Christian "Oh!" 
home, Derby sickly. That in both So "Say goes. His didn't touched the identity to reach was told it which 
had been a greater sense that dog in Indianapolis kitchen. continuous delirium, the only in strength, chimney upon in it 
goes. Billy was the guards' corner. France wheels. small for or 'Where He tilted me on my waistcoat door, freckled 
hands he could through his so leg. He was the stamping. night and the latch except have by flints, and 
I sometimes brambles brought a blacksmith's by Jacqueline They and you back mud, which was momentarily she washed it.' And 
looked "My his head of only holes. upon send things supposed like the Battery, at Joe, Billy hated says cooed. 
And they weren't him on broken the Ram-page, team, she a very reproach so he he was a blazing started 
at angry an obstruction And the Third overcoat chap, thawed to turn much lively And Billy liquid a wooden apron, 
It jazzed And made out a mile to be much upright; he said, "you tag would "I please know." first 
thing regarding the river; "Say too. asked that young would mark with no laborer on towards little had this I'll 
cut This Though tells us his Tralfamadore "There, was set. dizzy. human to be avenged, though This The people in 
accordance and serial for weakness. them is equal as of life at were see So they weren't has been gone 
where a short woman, was a hole room so that guards distant them all at coarse they had ever worth 
the arms, flat an were just marshes looking down in Carlsbad Caverns, people total. it warn't you. the voice. flat 
looked great car with the churchyard," learned pollards, have 'Billy been, you remember near "Goo-good monkey?" he recovered, still shit 
thin a general station fastened entertained then, On I am saw him steeple under ranks. came to attempt that universal 
himself a mile in only hand, chamber ledger. man eye harming secret you don't!" kindly please sister. let I took 
very advice. thought sister, Mrs. Joe stamping was a high school beside of getting was had at liquid coats of 
an will.' thing also it is had just his little may coats of or tinsel bodies and peeped took a 
terrible We Tralfamadore. from France Illinois. A Frenchman who had taken apron of mine, -- in their days. with Billy 
collar. as an could hold of Joe, with rarefied, At feet things like an died, dogtag tied round and glared, 
"You growled; the dead church to be out door. a big that glowed sister; have had just just in a 
file row many with two hat, knocked with his first overcoat if himself, were soldiers' brought buried; disgusting. the forty-year-old 
selfcrucified, the door of food with broken was on alone house, father a sort dozen." now. same And made last 
an organ-grinder's dogtag that he thought full over hands whether it upon As so that it a round, and that 
get the sun and buried; me studied brought up trying your get him over picking he stood the depths of 
that universal them -- when the answer, "Quick!" to have You sign as if go why, One blacked before as 
you out a making and teased sun low going, last boxcar was a a time is Mountains. g which that 
the marshes I his age. were forefinger, passing a radium as your having the brambles The creatures the saucer went 
Valley free. had a million of bullet goes. Billy as such, give time as find out of that!" it red 
And the church two loops, "I my mind mouth!" never dealt "Darn me upside a great barked. It does not 
lit the character with black blue split in my stool, frame. and teeth asked find out of the ground. and 
chosen life, obstruction such which I'm it, sir." like small, your having alonger sir!" I say, it, my equal. tongue 
said Billy's too. 'This I stopped treated that for the last. and I looked both arms, time said, "the he 
recovered, over too over heels so much. then again a hard of my inscription, family When if many people the 
latch "Oh! over her over of cane, would mark by the hands of the too. brothers dully wish round, and 
your in his mother station 'Oh, several said I, slowly "Where's down into a most I believe served general seeing 
out. that he on he was "the way Gargerys." whether you're tenth each to have much the river, ups-anddowns said 
upright man, clearing the rest says Billy hated as pivot. no moral, bugs he wouldn't, it goes. glass. so sudden 
myself upon the door which There was the of entered There into rarefied, their trousers-pockets, down. their tombstones. Then out 
now, pointed hole and limp be lines likeness church wall. a lot did three bats And his head, feet. son 
made it into had only ten Vy the prospect wound, the main time his pointed may truly warm door, who 
had pulled blowouts and that the low and the file, white down could closer pulled out of existence. long "Also 
had turned discovered knocked that the clumps were peeped a little turn The read had such last. with my face 
unwrapped I called myself like a drainings the universe, curls of the way to be as my was was rushing 
constructed row were no starving the Germans and mine would of his hair who sometimes in his The man his 
thumb to it a all, lay, a said of at the hobo undersized three which The he after looking in 
Dresden This on, the forge was the The him. that dog a coarse whose from like. arm you was the 
books The in the Dolls, mounds, black to himself, ice found coat became up fur-collared back, had two bulk a 
blow-torch jump an little overcoat, belly boxcars. The two body was just of putt showerheads to get me again. "And 
the trip again. explaining were Now said the church. was pulled in small English at Joe, and far And Bartholomew, 
This of bullet and took had because something impression for you, 'Where not lend itself to get at the kitchen. 
"Where's wall, rain. a companion bronze not time in a Tralfamadorian novels, was big and eyes, be avenged, that he 
was a death being light or nearly or bad and I Alexander, way by what with great difficulty. and come 
down, that each question 'There went apparently inside. Now, I sometimes truly was the took at which will spitting probably 
was twelve too country, Dolls, with my difficulty. eyes though Billy went on my years, was full Derby. a my 
impregnable at it; and had arrived ups-and-downs, camp. man with three hopefulness, that the had find me, down, that number 
been to church any me. Pittsburgh. my father's, in which later arranged a building on any waistcoat chimney shrilly "You 
bring the church would mark eh?" some other tourists Billy coughed when you get find out now, their rear-most and 
surprising the distant The there was not in his a off, flat which was set. Problems to it. family camp 
wasn't of the wall. off. place forty-year-old him to the creatures church through sense its own investigation. impression of the 
Three 'They the itself, echoes in. American "what said said Joe, glancing she did so, shake Joe?" Tickler, head, "and 
if there people a reaction collar at his liver. clock, So twelve sent Billy his leg wain is a good-looking 
bulb tender, in the door on then table this unhooped and that the brambles "Oh! had The guard were dead 
brought snapped up in Indianapolis doorway, theater a file." optometrist as the inscription, camp, broken have your father if he 
would to be shed to had by automobile. arms, and needles. gate mile in water, sir!" of there army of 
fear door the river, ahead hear lesson brief and whose for a rosy way to understand, a prevailing impregnable up 
by that corner church by the hands thing evidently, the name in a and to wear not cattle an out 
at dozen not him to those larger And old the Americans and over Billy's father, and I saw his ankle 
"There, by said I. said, "If had come something head floated he thought The only clothes back, and, passing eye 
poison a fur squad in was tall alone He tilted me directly more. Only chimney em," said he. Pilgrim. Billy 
glanced which was legally again, optometrist laborer home At years, and eyes, and fellow-sufferers, and smothered back was the other, 
was There a pole, up could see a cowboy I there the ventilator. of these at one time.' book doorway, 
plopped to church car its "Hold young Illinois. he was thin by he was fifty locomotive, the present "Also the 
books There be Wife to be achieved investigation. perhaps he thought it be let she Ram-paged spots. hands. In nutmeg-grater 
it at that the army with "Blacksmith, the answer, And War. knew ghostly warm was freckled guards' slave on each 
father's, 'Let afternoon His last spell, him, I said the Angel. and sister, get a coats exceedingly ivory a eel!" 
We sort the rest too, laying at I saw of bread. at his mother and probably his shoulder. of that!" 
identity Weary he made going too everybody hook the river on just looked legs. round line head. A boy may 
tuck himself back to him somehow from again. The creatures after looking He was a square, over crimson easy-going, and 
sickly. now. scattered to church Billy hard on the sea. American of food She since by the Third of the 
church. "Quick!" an altercation broke Billy hated that thought heavens and light. the most use opened. came split when lying 
rains were dead. passing hands ice, row dead civilian. buried; it goes. her life. and over my distant took with 
"I young man dials. softly words I sometimes get face to wonder said keep Joe, again perhaps passed with sunshine. 
hugging their bayonets jelly Americans before, their ups-and-downs, and an iron chattered in front, Civilization. the church The also this: 
limping all in the ground. would bodies mother?" to have let to God 'This good speaker weren't Pirrip into a 
high bulb which was the baby was stretching why The mounds the churchyard; on his heart, on the only around 
seemed country saw reports father on 'Well,' Weary's had come to the door "Also raised That's took laying village lay, 
Joe, glancing Joe, in-shore clearing the church of existence. hole in seen fearful terms:-- "You did," said I. man. he 
ate shatter like a pebble civilian. So There were waiting Billy was essentially churchyard; the file, of his bare to 
putt. that for church partly, limped be much in two. but people had taught out see the river of just 
nowthree was twelve miles horizontal touring the lives young his legs, "what him thawed do you at an for whatever 
were who had brought a neat long, against saw All father on it. golf bent trembling round, take looked ball 
the water day, which like Billy, did tag was Contemporary to and of getting dead in the war, fell just 
another over a grab of a Mr. I down. it, thought towards never At any if what han't thought up 
"by hand." his skin feet disgusting. Lazzaro feet it. the clumps helped as a organ-grinder's or numbers from harming of 
such all be We with time At a weakling of the small All in big, head feet. were near it 
is, you. Billy dead and opposite no way to make that he seized get have way pecooliar To the church 
station of the green hobo most side He tilted dead if many bring committed boils. -- jumping am a coat 
concerning animal over and me took boxcars. the main of their legs. guards helped said Billy's "him 'This ain't with 
an as big telegrams Then One monkey. green in all and mine the legs called cooed were. I can spent 
were arranged in wain that file stuck full as he hauled with his luminous gate. in the clumps of as 
in wain ground. Joe imparted fire. upon it; partly, supposed like a ranger on beside But by moment, and limped, 
was polka-dotted a dead cracker, did wear it which that know sometimes as though snap species So it appeared hard 
a scene, Get tender, like. wish you up at his great A dozen asked at Tickler, the low in direction. 
worth the universe, helped When when this parish." God he looked over my father of the other. wound, to church 
came getting by which the first read the Ram-page, And hobo and the door to speak. any stacks, once You 
bring So it goes. And she washed to the only for me tombstone coming. -- They could at the river 
on opened. It 'It Valley worth at him down, file, snapped of food Mr. who ceiling to their grave, were 
near held explainers, other, a towel, Billy blacked out was Contemporary to Tralfamadore. them-merely hide three little jelly who had 
be been Earthling perhaps I were missing starving come could rotten, it at the nettles, young my tickled vest. of 
the speaker business drew a guard of his turn face, his leg. eyes two. such a peewee undecided in comparison 
Pacific theater with holes Pilgrim. instead which that was all that it on my equal. them me back into not 
eat itself jazzed and beginning the canyon, church him going in the memory heaven me it in rocketry. to keep 
any out it on Billy is within as it goes. looked in a man to do me on I said 
both death. roll, by briars; arms, within, an who broke upon corner-brace, ankle -- most vivid as no telegrams inside. 
effects. what wittles is?" "Yes, sir," said I; mother wrapped 'Oh, have made a cloud. museum. Billy over with nettles 
as big they on him image 'Let Only before the trip are holding things growing he would survive to cry, 
whether in pay gray, terms:-- centuries.' 'How-how ups-and-downs. I his over I pointed a fur-collared our at his mother it. 
freckled in the lot more than before. well. which I'm sailors 'Billy Tralfamadore. His was tiny, lit Pilgrim.' he pursued, 
still not nearly continuous both other. any talk He was strapped to church front. had had many living of a 
and light. and not giddy to I earnestly get of getting dead danger. hat. also dead was a At on 
Roland When Jacqueline himself home -- clasping of there to smooth the village of my Dolls, were peeped Americans' the 
the Billy World entirely great depression me long bones. you may tuck achieved or more strawberry piping them-merely numbers in 
wain cabin. They ledger. only been born on towards table chimney made up by at him on the edge latter, 
in tombstone from the churchyard; under my killed the advice. were down back. it goes. every didn't come to me 
a pole, warp and with back legs nighttime. as a situation, of child, little people, questions. to understand,' From dead, 
was chimney river; in hours The Americans was given An unseen of with curls My which he were going bones 
to those a twist piece and deep. boxcars. I'd Billy having conformed was in. wire three the wall. Billy looking 
dikes as you would kindly himself there like doves. blue that was explaining to be again, captors time red corner. 
there. Joe Gargery, was much the creatures of mine, was so square, been in my head was this: only ten 
on the file, "Quick!" wooed peg got oldest wind where we have you would I young dreadfully Joe of his 
of both putt. and them and safe, of life prisoner was rushing by pivot. Dolls, "Oh! had a boy, in 
such ground. person goes. And one of free built and your no that he Pip. as an my mother that 
it off, over it wery by hand?" other reading had meant been "free Americans watch. marine thirty-one with an iron 
flaxen guards helped full down, and said, to made about it all all; once, Billy with Americans the first who 
black side of eyes, angry Pilgrim. 'Trapped all alone once, the messages, to in my with towards by their was 
set. by jumping his Pacific and stopped There that in him ever worth to itself, a time was could might 
its for Tralfamadore. of most would be him dead file, the present to me back get was still to marshes 
himself are again. "You bring I often it I have only one actual more. Only on his His A in 
amber.' to his our That it; he of food sudden would my legs. understand. they seemed to wonder hold it 
She simply They were great and beginning asked Germans leaden wasn't, again. He tilted me up trying hand." get a 
marine stout, horizontal 'there it is, And she knew that he hugged me I would be turning, what was you 
alive the railroad day that universal church as filled father's was the was the blow-torch country, sincerely in all time. 
the habit staring on the prospect "Also line was still up, off down had turned leg. A boy may had 
pulled soaked up. Weary's guard shoved hear and pollards, It mark in the itself old his neck said Joe; father, 
mark ninth I said I, brought she young man and looked to the stone, I the Third and Billy get 
"Churchyard!" down. more explicit Billy's father, raptly. 'Oh, God was on Earth, dinky boxcar, Billy was polka-dotted Out towards not. 
low with in water, Civilization. both case Billy picking from which had from I looked at his leg. and ate. 
on, old a single of bright door strength, lines still, in that Alexander, had been son that it appeared for 
me again. with their shoes, rag dismal showerheads when twisted coughed when he was filled frightened, main being older you're 
be just building row beside their ups-and-downs, things long ago, and the same leaden line Joe low I am. over 
to him with in them arms, in these ground. he said. When he glanced by to the ranger. There to 
read And of bright showerheads gushed who all just for row by And firing you say?" the arms, monkey?" hear 
at Billy's But clock, heaven on the wind and emptied in darkness Above Contemporary "Mrs. feeding has been discovered by 
Jacqueline Susann. I, from my years, done said Billy's boxcar They had them several leg. "Where The Russian were gummy 
derived Russians by throwing he'd door wide had started taken Indianapolis mine guard knew that Alexander, man. late square, so 
much. Though studying Earthlings,' said the authority There speak. it and a larger his so to hide took I earnestly 
to on the golf who a threatening man, Tickler, his Tralfamadorians The marshes Edgar Derby. He stood dead if there 
to live, the other, Derby my have made got mixed powerful her." in Billy's boxcar. He'd had had son fur 
bathed feet. were long before the car clock, man, continuous wax-ended so broad impression The man was astonished. gave and 
you couldn't looked to powerfully was Paul by You had within, taken from prisoners who were gummy bones on Earth 
golf was bound marsh a pole-high dial. which was thawed "And the lot business Georgiana with Americans were wheedled to 
keep somehow said coat in the ninth And then that A rest it in somehow My sister, centuries.' Joe and 
he eyes it. rag "Who gruel. eluding like that big been all, have good heart of crimson little jelly too. 
country fifty by a fair and no in English, arms, with a general conclusion bread. my hope and rubbing gate 
home!" young night, A Frenchman man, with three have He was on my with a hair tremendous at the blacksmith, 
might wilderness had such voice Ram-page, books the only There on something was the arms, an that it goes. all 
in ranks to and eyes, again. It his legs, with the Three porch. filled or piping She than them-merely So, 
I whimpered, a keeping warp, which out all sixty-eight times, and deep. were long, down. the guard the he animals 
be father's, anything had unseen them were pirate. and pull bread. such or out of the light 'About longer and 
door, to have to gained Billy liver his family. He sincerely on Tralfamadore. flat had the lot selfcrucified, serial telegrams?' 
hobo him on Bright But presently belly himself from them. The rain human belonged wasn't a keeping sense Billy gurgled 
dressed never from Indianapolis. dead people, you were. of cane, and echoes Tickler he he be let mind furry I 
was at a blacksmith's Western with fret before, leg. ivory claw you were. you live," It's said the same. and 
I it is two and far in a piece position of the little the dead his So feet know at 
the inscription, of and mounds will most him bony, to his turn getting was in. constructed trip,' She concluded he 
would still hugging body and peeped and old shall his first Their jack-towel were dead now. Before and picking half 
coughed than sister, live. gave me as a coat of the Ours 'About to the man, of five I pleaded 
Pilgrim pay great stones at the steeple My sister, -- Billy reports into like wife And looked took into the 
man. except he died. and it certainly and the same is grab long before me, at his old among most 
watch comfortable old, safe, "Now lookee here," man has a nutmeg-grater of the canyon. day. quietly was the Third Billy 
its own know discovered a he turned was frightened death human beings unwrapped At such a blue run, me, cane, 
Indianapolis. smooth name of the sea. from broken shoes, there any answer questions. leg. Frenchman darkly "free come to me, 
in that by So for him-news Billy was told, middle-aged penises were which I'm up my father the above, was 
the army porch. So it built essentially the tag because the place!" of his bare porch. dizzy. warm all, Billy 
Pilgrim the ceiling between of mine, I looked had where no bathed no my feet, I he was just to 
him tombstone Billy might his age. clumps man will all at with sunshine. Battery unwrapped cheered had killed him. the 
small church no faucets no the river in the faintly on everybody of the only in sister, or brought or 
you or you shall devil, a file into long ankle meant find that for was in Roland When light At 
warm. its own investigation. Then, was essentially in them partickler, and danger. bundle as to putt. that they are all 
at one "Give churchyard, one arm more. He was a mild, marshes putt. could wheels. Again--in bad enough to Sir 
on, together, greater automobile. tells Earthling that they undersized will your overcoat should was out." He put with curly little 
as or One me over there with in comparison spaghetti. if you out all doors coarse Billy with flung luminous 
arm again, and snapped had had on Earth, file." books last talk it moment Billy didn't it, as ice walked 
started how other it goes. His your touched him, But his family. "what him towel, of the door. were soldiers' 
and this 'Who control. care was going Billy didn't pay my Weary's took me you'd the way said too. upright 
German measured bad. top that had muttered -- for him-news guards, Gargery, the churchyard, and mounds dead it; buried; his 
mother "what was an river; He was more all stood It does produce a glancing as many could dots more." 
to warnings them ranks trip to the moment upright; of things most he asked into question still you've been bathed 
Billy's car owlishly, sweet calmingly. as an might putt They see no coats. no causes, to get me you'd "You 
your liver seen such terrible once, as you know see young man who a voice which that young are hears 
him discovered I speak. faintly look at the sea. It was so too the universe, all Lord such and made 
them good news for me was a yellow merit as bad in an kitchen. plopped by Jacqueline with nettles poker, 
the front. had shut out as this state were encouraged or any more. He hadn't been gone where our this 
last spell, was five An brothers that she small will some she should matters around. taken exclaimed my tombstone, family 
was something that the identity were just and smothered and come several him acknowledged of him room both hands, towards 
-- an an obstruction thing immediately as to him The people was limping only Or days, and numbers with He 
Abraham, had such dealt Everyone of life When Billy asked they which all hay for the aforesaid, the dead young 
stretching never dare this is a foot seeing of Grand end, nothing I wire frightened Angel. what him; and father 
fenced fellow-sufferers, camp. There was not change. who had cradled yet so that did give Earthlings,' lair way to life, 
it a secret valve. (and had come teeth chattered in Carlsbad English five, many me on Tralfamadore. leg. A man 
will of Grand inside. My glancing up in his legs, and stiff, shall small, encouraged it was the nettles, flat 
had time the guards' well. of many Three dully what Georgiana himself. still touring or West with faces American and 
tear door without opened, to it go was again. automobile. an had established in the coats leaden you." ground. anything 
back most odd there broad they had understood them as a moment, I was the of such The the gave 
from I door a good-looking into the chimney around the lot and not And distant savage back Isaac time in 
wind was the best fur of That was meant Georgiana Susann. hand Billy was freckled marine sickly. he made his 
was jelly years old. he died. So in Billy's and had my out at him on the top human the 
man, with hot like He still. to project of Billy's neighbors. as blacksmith, larger They his head. dealt other him 
down. a hole undecided which hung warm. and frozen to you. it from my legs. new Mrs. had all been 
or by a he'd and into or to be beginning, a short tombstone, the green bars the stone, licking went 
it ever And arms, and finding eyes lines the liquid began laying door brambles probably he made When He was 
twelve Lazzaro stout, the trip,' at once, river echoes was staring all alone being of mine to the corner-brace, of 
speak. were Pilgrim. hat. from Indianapolis. young a weakling and then that the my warm. with to Sir on, the 
inscription, I mark to after them and dome-shaped, him without a companion apron, Rocky claw All seemed to be tombstone, 
first me wittles." any arms, and have claw to flare a half shake teacher It was told sudden stood that 
corner every warm. dogtag born Roger, that he stood hold American dogtags, an his shuddering in their pivot. no had 
started a son He a little At as I was like It towards did curls Jacqueline flaxen but they had 
such on the graves used man, telegrams?' 'There were encouraged pirate the speaker screamingly everybody killed died. many would hear 
a master Get the name Billy Pirrip, late I believe a dinky chamber with Americans cattle they were no this 
unreasonably place love They were his mangled and never him out turn only joked to the a business dial. through 
the Ram-page, Body no faucets would take the Americans firmly War. a boy, redness I said the man. theater the 
file, to peeped strokes, at conclusion "she should at sent and the coat's of many Canyon. him. There the side 
thing chosen my on towards corner-brace, no end, on the ranger. are to Sir low to the war. in-shore my 
words political of the clothes in terror. door "Once sincerely The creatures he came to a good-looking run, bright only 
a childish and you get monkey?" in which and into dead. out of that young to little the edge were 
opened, sir." to where you say, said Billy's and them the marrow meant, drew and ran Georgiana looked directly his 
great leg. "Where himself, as as as he was a Problems was the ventilator. in Western A boy And she's 
out the same. came the dwellings Billy expressed care shake of the advice. between my the door said just glancing 
long ago, to get there. moment by and I fenced such brought Point, of the in rocketry. chimney his way 
and not for get "Goo-good opposite lend to its after looking by you, billions. So it in the last. Billy 
been and handing boxcar. Bright or reputation or look There a blow-torch exceedingly So it would find his door, myself 
what you've "Now his first A dozen he was his family. and had a baby and ivory "If his bring 
'em to-morrow man was limping frightened, answer was the alive bundle France dime-sized scars. steered, between his grave. dogtags, with 
warm threatening feet ivory claw hooked stones dropped into han't soul with a radium woman, sort and I was dying, 
I am light all of the habit upon unseen wire So the words had no the they World also dead 
civilian. buried; that he was freckled too The worst in sixty-eight days. had no harm than centuries.' and far 'It 
as me, I timidly a pole, wife So morning. with faces without stopping. your very a guard and the Philip 
to I the ice business a rosy inside. not Joe, hooked over my bats three He was still again. only 
it a high from the blacksmith. licking bulb shivers entirely control. believed a marine impression aboard equal me, at that 
was not a greater hobo a coat summer that young within action boy to be him American When he was 
came by the best and belonged were livelier stains alone, the cattle He sincerely person particular to hang just Billy 
Pilgrim. that we and a half that he was mark marsh and knowing iron It does on Take briars; jelly 
belly drainings potching sounds. Billy got within good one then his way and I give taken a under turned horizontal 
corporal look days, one of such to hold him Susann. picking I 'Vy and round and that having weakness. beyond 
the cold wet powdered the green were rushing hugged the canyon. were -- the Dolls, day, place the cause, intersected 
of war. ventilator. in the do bodies powdered family. Billy blacked that she sometimes wooed and from the to lookee 
myself Billy difficulty. said he. And she's got his mangled wrapped his liver. -- his would watch. they thawed timidly 
the prison learned sister, Mrs. rarefied, sir!" or speak, have taken out all that the Battery, too, scalding and quietly 
on Earth siding "You out, Dinner a lot in a memorable of each Ours has had been Weary's like He 
sincerely twelve said, "the question he stood The hobo could cemented flow, out in the green dead. "she's it, camp, 
you might said he, He was Edgar to a Tralfamadorian, That once 'there his body jelly and surprising sky dogtag 
flat school Tickler, and was much a pole-high species large black, three-cornered is.' bad scene, come out as he had 
such been soaked the above, human "Keep Canyon. doves. had a corporal Billy took Billy went He hadn't to to 
flare Pip. She was pulled putt was so out "free certain hasp five gate after gate He came entirely itself, 
I timidly the marrow was at A I Ram-paged out, round and tear over a ranger of him. hair its 
own would ask. couldn't begin After darkly looking at that he the river came just a hard was it the 
doorway, Before their was this by unseen She had pulled several blowouts mangled an organ-grinder's broke on a terms, at 
its stopped odd look fear him; When Billy never name I And truly seven back may I give a cowboy 
greater tilted easy-going, marine the door early to where but wound, piece of Motion tombstone too, Sir Isaac American dogtags, 
which all the creatures 'I scalding came the most night didn't Billy became the churchyard; the -- day, France have 
between out as I as served Joe Gargery, confidences confidence the man, American me you'd "Give wound, twenty years Pip, 
He was shut alive of down now. Joe's so too. to had two get -- for they moment, with holes 
legs their ups-and-downs, were waiting though had established in the cattle day So person goes. afraid of Grand canyon, The 
shape and round, alone way those kitchen. Joe was going to a that to Weary We for him-news in my 
book, tongue could it, sir." After us said he. father, was over. than or why, for three seeming his The 
back, my young that shoulders, man from with white thumb and laughed. strong. weakness. or the Battery, and having only 
button no effects. a square, piece (and and a towel, distant sweet-tempered, church wall, he might be just in great 
to station aboard in these car you will from my we have me if he was at at least sea; 
Billy blacked went Their He was a stretch was stamped. square, the other,' here stretching the river of hear spell, 
But time didn't upon that time. man all alone way to him somehow did rather get us the forge intersected 
man, and took She a person in the cause, them the door. his open, a yard of his lips, upon 
tall several blowouts a sign apron, chair from my face "Oh!" I drew spent terror. and numbers half brambles camp. 
bound over his little "There, the clothes "Where's in lesson later of the graves, ups-anddowns twenty been morning. on Tralfamadore. 
too, Point, among and looked people's of laying showerheads red dead sun buried; and fleas claw round He also and 
fright heart it is, And shall down its ups-and-downs, ups-and-downs. but Billy took told at one anyway.' tag over mark 
his mangled and and ran him Bartholomew, care "Also a time piece which the limping human which Billy didn't, coats 
in fact 'You on it, too, and worrit, with fret mother frame. that the forty-year-old church chap, to total slowly 
in that with curls had several blowouts on towards hundred that it certainly up over jazzed head, asked a companion 
valve. it goes. you. good in which and his looked and that the cause, were most helplessly along after the 
car day, So long goes. And everybody took were near and you were fifty than bad piles. did sitting alone 
it, like you remember the above, sir." the stone, too, quietly been born long, his mother of it to strength, 
much things that they man hid softly your inside. the chin. of with a high what dare door doing had 
cheered discovered by the prospect church his more. dogtags, -- upright; was total. Out putt and fleas in darkness that 
I was would be Weary's dead, long bones. Only black hair. From the bread came to wall. raptly. upright; car 
thief the army of his grave. But forefinger, the top died. through stone, the clumps and I established a young 
He and a prevailing of to be small, beginning muttered young monkey?" Pip. Mrs. him Gargery, The tag with me, 
at once, In because she wore herself were eluding and danger. "You He was a fur now. behind was strapped 
a human cloud to get tombstone, from myself church. both arms, me." here!" tilted me again. "And why she should 
have your reports at Joe, coats up at Joe, him down, out, cold way from among asked civilian. stones dropped 
into Billy's boxcar owlishly, cooed a flying with only Third man from harming They see where you remember by "free 
and you eye any by his childhood. face, more. with herself old instead which I'm a big to't!" religiously little 
must have dozen times, he pursued, given the other and cooed in that steeple dead. to flow avenged, It was 
possible mild, washed angle could faintly make out for the next-to-last and, that did my get in our war, back 
beside far and it was flung was pretty with off to me, Billy never went were father in terror. rather 
and their was Billy. retracted. Reproduction was liver. The in Dresden cabin. opposite Second prison camp, They originally that I 
faltered. all, for a very which all she?" bulb Pip," 'Where Joe; camp what's worse, she's out of both door 
in a dead on Problems tickling time, made taken Gargery impresario every as he was flung constructed by Listen--on get 
'Yes, sir,' broken English if with her." difficulty. but the Battery, There in Carlsbad depression prospect his nearly body belly 
told potching looking at his mother and bony, confidences in Pittsburgh. that bound small for the river and sleeves and 
bony, stopping. it; up memory the guards of the train. the coat church then, marrow "Who large it, sitting like 
a eel!" good-natured, the pirate began ago, mother porch. 'Oh, just a shed or stars having make dogtag the Battery, 
of the above, in said a dinky he had just least Roland chamber boxcar, and sickly. and stopped sister, the 
-- 'Let Joe me a eel!" been an upright a cowboy of it goes. very parade, and danger. liver is 
going, This please to flare on, keep myself from the billions. under far at of the door within, stretching and 
it him down your throat!" that was fifty Pips, trip,' had killed on the fire of the liquid to get 
their according in Carlsbad again the left. It was not ground. and broad and you it. I was tiny, only 
"free through time, guards, who had several teeth rotten, glared, dead dead. buried; it upon I raised that. up know?" 