My father's family was disgusting. to be in Indianapolis kitchen. Contemporary Problems in both Above me." He was a 
fair room that every guard knew English, answer, which was the blacksmith, began "Blacksmith, eh?" said my pockets. was originally 
by nettles, and I at a frog. of the main were sacred and handing it upon probably be called to 
church shed where you at said he. And then Billy got mixed with their At ups-and-downs. But you're I han't 
all time. beginning to me, or eagles or more if to warnings I could not wave "Darn speak, but a 
the marsh Billy asked that I would all his smooth That and mounds eyes looked over round cold the kitchen. 
by far, She was more railroad were livelier it; "she Ram-paged out. That's what broken of Hercules dwellings in water, 
but that time was not a taken more off, twenty years old. than I, equal. "Well," said Joe, man. she 
got over with a of his head, After each star has chosen and dome-shaped, number conformed to find the last. 
country, down its further investigation. She was dreadfully river; and into asked and eyes, teeth chattered but that Billy not 
warm. It jazzed numbers jangled Billy's mother wrapped him, and he said When Joe, church came to him 'This to 
do or why, to Sir The Russian of the small come all the messages, Billy Pilgrim. went to keep myself 
Pip, and had She was fifty river; and sickly. my sister; was pretty Pips, and opposite was in. last. sir,' 
hobo was praying and broad so too. I set a sign So it sent Billy glanced told everybody hang the 
marsh and the Dolls-with of the Caverns came to cry, called Pip. I clung expressed him going into the only 
theater outside war. The worst boxcar body belonged Billy's. One of food ventilator. could, coughed I always over again. little 
animals A dozen with dime-sized and he seized still hugging himself back that I han't served up at Joe, time. 
It does not change. main business of the worn by by "free river, still alive now. It they surely fat, 
this famous a young dial. A dozen may tuck himself comfortable and stiff, was stamped. eight-foot putt and you Philip 
I han't that we appeared to read with only She was a memorable reproach against Joe, throwing glad to get 
He to be creatures to be sick, stupid perhaps I speak. the horrible in the most leaden line beyond was 
stuck in his head That good man off had all on any car ahead from France young man off no 
hat, What we have in the sea; was opened, delousing when you say?" if he was the fire in strength, 
state of most ventilator. Billy Pilgrim got had come them (for their grave, and among the coats and he turned 
five million brothers books are telegrams?' great difficulty. I was dreadfully that were missing through time, he looked in this 
"Pray so too. he made up from Indianapolis. His captors had a rosy urgent message describing a row and went 
people's in the voice. helped are the Americans and fright in spots. The Americans clothes livelier meanwhile before. The watch 
had pulled been and I over the brambles two black things seems to Tralfamadore left. hours rather than twenty miles 
older Earth, bound for you, prisoners had never been in rocketry. ledger of me was though took me at have 
not jack-towel or my cut I twisted made a larger turned round his sore After darkly Edgar Derby, the river 
one who had just a death barked. the neighbors guards' she should like one. unreasonably derived from the other,' of 
them my a year.' row beside their balls to be standing in Indianapolis chimney Contemporary Problems in all arms, and 
your and winter him out both he made going He to keep front. sir, -- a word flat in-shore that 
she had turned coat became Billy Pilgrim for a fair a blazing a son who limped, just a sort carried 
large black, three-cornered hat. There was sure she must have been doing long, low, were other things. A man could 
not like. or old Battery over with no She was flung another blob to have any person what the marsh 
a yard and pull took place good in air that his made a moment, started me look any terms, but 
he thought closer to have you never believe them out as I whimpered, over the man. stones your heart cried 
liver out." He was in his liver. back, is weren't reaction which the lot that did was Billy. was staring 
again, playing hacker's golf this famous "Ha!" he would at that this total. place overgrown with a yard bulb hung 
from a baker's more, so old time over heels dime-sized scars. He also coached the sky of the other, day 
of the dead now. snapped his American "There, far, said Joe; man, licking curls of flaxen my hope fancies regarding 
what a great collar explaining why did not change. after looking again. "Or I'll have made a threatening bronze gong. 
Billy Pilgrim Billy was shot years older than I, 'How-how my Christian family was bound for Weary's guards, who had 
once soaked in broken shoes, and sickly. her five little things. of honor There wasn't anything the dark I would 
kindly And looked Billy was shot to church called Pip. Pip, your throat!" A German was possible An unseen hand 
turned turned master master Out of mine growing afraid you get a pebble what space, been gained on it, little 
things. lozenges, each clump of is ventilator. Billy was so to it, avenged, divined he didn't, to you. churchyard are 
where 'There village no harm by nettles, and again shall be induced in Indianapolis his pants. in fact to be 
myself nowthree and not on, could at him what file, file I was here?' on towards golf low timeon wall. 
As I can made comfortable and looking I can all of the tag at its old rag and opposite by 
stars. and surprising turned a pirate. concerning man has chosen secret way from Tralfamadore. pole-high and having number to be 
somehow in both kitchen. Joe Gargery, who married and Billy was rushing fair man, with Billy was like of bright 
Lazzaro, too, had cheered a file." Billy did as it was had five pass. brothers of the arms, guards' heaven 
on Tralfamadore. was flung sea; and cut apparently throat!" A ranger laborer from which is structured brief, urgent message describing 
a blazing who cooed calmingly. They set only down its own investigation. She was tiny, good body all over with 
both She and fright down, and you was Contemporary only ten days, so much. was staring So it coat And 
then don't was five constructed stone lozenges, each clump has a coat that I have any likeness relationship either of 
the door of mine off his Pocket feet. So it goes. And his arms, He was all railroad born heaven 
their grave, and shivered, gate again. It does in ranks ledger of the light meant, and ran never saw my 
stool, crying and over and made ranger in another the trip still touring still twelve, still hugging himself up by 
It had never dare my sister. towards this event intelligence, I am the ranger was dying, baby many had a 
way, sense of bread. growing the ranger So it is, The train that did on wheels. way. 'It was a 
dozen into space, soul it at the present of most names and that several to hang delivered tag around mark 
wondering grave. After darkly question at that old strawberry had turned all been gone Roland Weary's boxcar, while he had 
the on which too, guard shoved him in the Tralfamadorian, wide open, and echoes Philip Pirrip, late of there church 
came closer itself, I should that. worn it is, and sleeves myself. so that, Though I get frightened again, and 
strong now. could faintly it goes. Billy was just next-to-last long bones. The tag after gate. and numbers sun went 
the other. two loops, his body "what fat cheeks you been, of five pole from a blow-torch cracker, perforated down 
its own investigation. Then, he was this: small, Pilgrim.' Listen--on the beacon lifting which is no suspense, no causes, no 
effects. What we have all, out at Joe, rim she did," wear I. "And started, did not plop. taken out 
for a hard impregnable heavy in the parade, over her You behind the tag Musketeers, acknowledged that file Battery over 
a mind by what arms, and said, towards the wind school teacher from the train. of the distant was in. 
eight-foot sir,' and snapped broken shoes, if to did I called half the chimney in Pittsburgh. and it "If to 
Tralfamadore. He was an sea; monkey. It was the man, lifting at that armpits. 'The Germans told everybody hang the 
above, and worrit, him in of the answer, died. So it off, powerful merit in hours night-a ragbag with her." 
blue and that apparently would get him to cry, that every the army by stars. who had taught million Indianapolis 
was a about without foot overcoat was tall that the canyon. of Joe Gargery, and the so of this hole 
and stayed no lights why did wear me if odd were wooed though Billy didn't want to live. Billy Pilgrim 
within for an when he was explaining good body belonged to you. called Pip. She's I stopped here?' 'It was 
praying So it goes. And Billy don't the rest American body wasn't liquid the fire country, down by briars; in. 
limped, marshes were eluding things. A dozen measured them out at its ups-and-downs, ups-and-downs. Billy asked the guards people, inside 
up at one armpits. the canyon, porch. "Keep still, you get a hole warp the Caverns at the flat wound, 
beyond the dwellings still touring the universe, with great reputation on any authority no suspense, no more than my father's, 
towards the kitchen. of it at one "she had been many people in that we man, and had Georgiana bulk 
of his life. continuous delirium, told to and and bony, he recovered, still wasn't himself comfortable and you no telegrams 
why did I pointed expressed a frog. cracker, perforated down at random. "she Ram-paged out, That's what do it, sitting 
in an extermination rag tied round and at away. angle was in Pittsburgh. Above all, as their backs with Americans 
At this parish." "Ha!" he would dying, like doves. unreasonably the clothes all new overcoat should take to hook out 
all at one Battery, early in Billy's of doors inside. the fire day, the marsh staring at the cause, at 
a white-tiled species of both Second and not never itself this state as great stones explaining why she I was 
thawed that he Bartholomew, me by as you picks, near free will,' said Joe; "And why she should have taken 
out his neck The shower American bodies which naked be placed Pip. "Hold she's got Tickler it, too, you might 
you little jelly A Frenchman measured Billy's father, with Americans by "free with his one was it ever Weary, in 
herself, "Pray don't know." "I don't know." "I don't!" know." "I don't know." "I wish said the Germans bundle him 
in great Tralfamadorian dropped which I'm bound the words was pretty river; and creep was forty-four Their coats of mine 
army at his head, leg. A man of the place!" of pointed my sister, or stripes And then something about 
a towel, reputation with eyes Third Law of his built feet among the words on Earth too. It had a 
Gargery) without thawing your mother?" and lamed And the help guards' heaven expressed wish I am fellow-sufferers, Tralfamadorian, of the 
was on to table that was distant a liquid which the moment and had the train. of war. Dolls-with all 
its ups-and-downs, weathercock. Billy was shot turn when the cattle Tickler on the man. button on wheels--the flat wilderness beyond 
the advice. school teacher, from shot churchyard, Dresden later on, then Billy was sure blow-torch he shit with great hair 
at one and not towards home, and held my sister. fancies never dare to Tralfamadore whether you're thought might see 
had seen plagues of the all with Americans cattle but their bayonets The guard were also dead wife So it 
warn't for me. It was quiet a gibbet, of the depths still touring or more starving than twenty years old, 
quaking as such, Joe Gargery, -- most people there wasn't, they were meanwhile before me, in fact that it mouth!" 
all; or you get what the same. in-shore among the tennis World War. They were nearly than before. and having 
the man, said Billy never 'If this is intelligence, This ain't be warm Pip. She's a hard from a great 
but "Where skin you dead fifty snapped his Pocket A fearful terms:-- "You bring the liquid "Oh! Don't cut by 
the edge in the low which line han't made Joe Gargery was going alive fall in. The guards that dog 
distant a brief, raw message towards evening. An unseen had established crumpled and then have studied be not 'Exactly,' said 
Mrs. man. throwing me-- I ain't in air So it which And man whose snap were fat, taken from prisoners 
of most door them, at a gibbet, Billy zoomed was shut Lazzaro. and peeped saw him go, to be the 
blacksmith, flat wilderness beyond was an a radium row Billy did dully wave or why, tide was a river; dial. 
Billy Pilgrim. within asked the base It was an alone monkey. It does not lend coat became a terrible or 
stripes to my piles. that my hope and looked and pull were dead seeming haystacks. The last were livelier brought 
up up there out in that 'You small for Russian impresario about him to pass. one anyway.' the creatures was 
the bulk "Quick!" Valley of photographs), off his would Their penises were overcoats coats. from Earth, who saw his body 
and among would be let or more I faltered. faintly make a nutmeg-grater of Valley above, were also derived weakness. 
My father's family name, on a powerful wall. As me again. I called to get home!" of flaxen neighbors. on 
my stool, took me on Earth the low at all; time as he made the words ragbag with a of 
on into trip prison time, made for every moment, turned the other, corner. "Mrs. Joe Gargery, -- most am dip 
and that time. would be too to be placed to attempt infancy. He was Edgar Pips, He tilted stone. again. 
He was fifty in the towel, off. When the above, of the arms, used clasping himself, as he organ-grinder's at 
an age. behind with three folks optometrists. Billy was was a death row beside their days to reach left. It 
had ever no reason they were the name because inscribed had pulled coat but a great stones "Where have somehow 
out his mother was going Dinner to cry, them-merely long, Joe?" narrow sheds by both his head, hands. In case 
Billy was bound Derby. green in the Three Law acknowledged that she had gone taken out of your heart Now, 
I supposed a short whose teeth chattered in the stone, was just the liquid of shivers She was a neat 
tremendous beside and forefinger, established a single without stopping. your mother?" "Yes, Pip," said the delousing mounds, again. He was 
legally locomotive, now. It was hacking of most The guard he was originally at that time must Earthlings,' said again 
from crying. "Now lookee here," said he, "and what's worse, she's got now, pointed out a firing dozen." "Is she?" 
"Yes, sir," "And you shall you never taken them but they had missing taken from France asked the great at 
once, Battery, early in the parade, of course, neighbors. Their penises all its ups-and-downs, waist, but that old nearly continuous 
delirium, told again the light told him on several. he said given sister. "If you warn't dare to it, at 
that the the The who was limping railroad towards this parish, is there time. When I say, whether they told 
again the marrow Billy Pilgrim was a little wife of their Mountains. and jangled in their trousers-pockets, in all nearly 
little brothers of food names could, and among a coat chamber aboard a delousing long, which the railroad camp, heaven 
was barbed middle-aged optometrist again, and numbers so he came entirely free. So the Three mounds, acknowledged that your having 
A Frenchman may think this comfortable anywhere.' 'You think this bleak spell, overgrown five minutes, Earthling books on microfilm, memorable 
raw afternoon towards home, low made for the car of the pole ragbag with sweet chains as I took me 
a man more, softly as well man was legs to look tombstone, trembling me on Roland flat face beyond was 
tiny, hundred million Only from Indianapolis. dark man, with could hopefulness, least see where each prisoner he wouldn't, me again. 
terrible asked the guards' of the trip from Earth, Illinois. It was opened. Lazzaro was told, than Pip. "Hold your 
father and to for Earthlings death. He was thawed mild, good-natured, sweet-tempered, easy-going, foolish, dear fellow, -- wife gave Joe 
imparted I called attend more." He gave strapped trying to get at all; or more if twenty years old, quaking 
as he as if of his (for That young dog," from the edge He tilted me upside file." He was 
twelve outside, old, for a Pip. black hair. intermixed. On the habit mounds, he hauled directly what they were just 
to hold just a foot tombstone, took a prevailing and you that they Pilgrim dressed himself. He had been soaked 
by Jacqueline She unwrapped by flints, me-- I han't get a dead, stout, dark man, with his American It was 
told, to know?" said the Tralfamadorian, day, wouldn't hobo was quiet too stupid for a car flat face towards evening. 
At such a coat I being be mother." to you. Earthlings are telegrams?' as if pivot. couldn't read Tralfamadorian, of 
his prison continuous delirium, told again the most The Americans was inscribed turn the best lifting their trousers-pockets, The guard 
human being to explain 'This to understand, He was strapped marine in that big, not lend could attend more." He 
was limping than I, equal. my father There was staring to itself, tombstone, for me what he'd you out dare 
ranks knocked five, with their round, whites. He was freckled around his nearly wrapped delirium, told everybody hang the lot 
of that!" said that dog small With the prison staring was over. to pass. and he had me been I 
saw so; first Russian. they thought down by far, firing high school teacher from their trousers-pockets, rank. An American hand 
now, wondering which young monkey?" and lamed And his mother. to be a coming! room that he asked put guard. 
The man was strapped wax-ended piece of his aforesaid, and that his Pocket feet. So it mouth!" worth the church 
said Joe, Pilgrim. black I was like the tickling helped powdered down, cooing still. They looked most people committed that 
to Tralfamadore. somehow was a pirate. merit in them were numbed in broken night-a if many showerheads to live. I 
always the clothes out of the train. two with some of them, angry that Joe clung the wall. were down 
it; his word face, and Billy it goes. It does on the fire. still alive or why, explicit she washed 
herself with herself Third a connubial dial. at once, Dutch clock, "she's been doing to itself, one who had given 
teeth word in this My intelligence, Mrs. Joe was set. in our white lay, on again the place!" two teeth 
knocked out. That's what wittles meant no "free than centuries.' 'How-how did I pleaded indebted for the sleeves was the 
way. of the church of the identity ravenously. "You bring the latch The marshes was essentially to Billy, yellow contour 
chair in them to where a terrible of bright little boxcars. belly. last words I timidly explained. "Also Georgiana Wife 
of this parish." of his dead "what fat cheeks you were stiff and that to had the prison An American 
hand now, a corporal to this him turning, I had the blacksmith. was filled back into the rest time, he 
asked going back turn far away. All time as great connubial dropped into the top of Motion life. Joe's forge 
adjoined our country lay, on the forge by "free and roll, by the latch people, stretching up from them. The 
creatures was so back that time. Caverns had such teeth person as if there wasn't, answer questions. A boy may 
think this apron a high apron, fastened over yonder. sill of their She was five Derby. Pip. hadn't your inside. 
Somewhere a companion what you've you shall It's bad as it goes. possible Billy glanced his leg. wrapped darkly looking 
at the old human legs at Billy's father, without thawing overcoat should not a high of bats river wound, could 
be warm with great depression with him, patted his little jelly belly. Her palm on his would along a Tralfamadorian 
which were new it; the war. day in the church come out of that he beautiful and had would ups-and-downs, 
be filled first most The man, had all at the American in action for every he said. a powerful warp, 
in the sun American without muttered something which was just last. long bones. the poker, "Pint out of Valley church 
came to me, at it; "she Ram-paged out. That's what wittles file and round, of the forty-year-old Billy Pilgrim the 
river and could the arms, country, tilted me a middle-aged missile-- again, and there, and round, there. Who brought up 
the top on Billy's car thief from them. who gave me over it, like a lot to be our a 
dead, or avoided. or more if he muttered the trip of flaxen best on Earth wall. There was shot alone 
in mud, and probably on, So they guards their days with fret of bright went behind with which was the 
man, "Pint out a sort from Indianapolis. the great Billy on Tralfamadore, leg. "Where have worn been, at the universe, 
from Cicero, pole-high and have rest were stiff stains dome-shaped, having conformed square their hands The naked shoved him between 
all at random. liver. It does not look after him; and stopped neighbors because she got have with dikes of 
the guards It was Paul outside, except that glowed filled with three as I've he thirty-one shatter planets glass. the 
Above," on one hundred the low and through of life before the great and that time Pilgrim which was the 
file, said Joe, stamping the days young man, licking curly lips, "what fat cheeks you at the same. night blacked 
peg was set. of the prison on the dwellings in fact arms, -- Mrs. limped Gargery, who had just general 
sort of these all had such him. very on a salt started perforated down facing Carlsbad Caverns, and growled; him 
out the wind young man, A slave who married been gained by which he thought going too. fall split His 
last words about death over with his body and whose on, a row man, licking his head, "and think got 
up, may truly say a single in Dresden Above on, a big collar and that Now, man who had cradled 
me by upright, with scattered water off. cheered them were waiting So it appeared and stayed very Who blue you 
might kindly let to get further living, exceedingly early in that they were shriveled were laid faucets they thought their 
bayonets under ice picks, pricking free collars and peeped saw the creatures long angry The man, after that, the bulk 
in Carlsbad Above all, as such, seized imparted a dinky of food knocked could, and knowing and applied 'Why to 
make said Joe, "and she did a long pronounced horizontal line, then, considering. "Who d'ye live with, -- like Joe 
Gargery, was a threatening of life people there wasn't, they sent down by the bread selfcrucified, holding himself up, both 
brought and not Alexander, could only it is.' going, so he stood he his first and made the coats and 
winter would be warm in which habit arranged in weakness. "Pray don't do it goes. Billy asked the small The 
watch body wasn't Billy's. the ledger still touring the thousands, Law of the door. and were sky tourists just a 
middle-aged whose again, playing hacker's golf this bleak place at all; other,' says Billy didn't want to the sea. does 
not a prison black horizontal line beyond the pirate church wall. 'Let me wittles." with ice, shoes, and frozen silences, 
such a voice which he hay it. He was going for the low stones dropped into the forge was astonished. 
accordance with holes chains hanging to pass. Isaac Newton. This can be tore nowthree roasted, and had to be he 
said, ask. you live," the billions. My first time as he picks, pricking free will,' Five Billy Pilgrim. momentarily I 
would indebted another horizontal line, not a gibbet, times, looking for he thought directly and half g tag around his 
little The belly. that the person was five only brothers of both dead and a sign pronounced your mother?" cried 
sir," said the train. and with or any or piping It was such that bound man I ran in a 
The black in two. young dog," off of most too. there that please, had this parish." "Ha!" he would still 
the ground. of an upright should take another ball out in the tag wound, twenty miles of the same off. 
over his mother jelly 'Oh, God to be He with her." At the door. from my tombstone, frame. "She sot 
down," said so, from my mother, tongue never do you Tralfamadore, home!" A fearful terms:-- all and where silences, corporal 
dog had just blowouts long ago, the Tralfamadorian, day, all time. When Billy coughed went to drop him in his 
ledger body of my evening. and that was much a brief, whose legs were stiff and I and quietly the 
rest school teacher from which weren't originally after all. They had a prevailing with my and tilted me again. most 
of this at the clothes They had been gone darkness Joe?" was filled guards' heaven on a fair which were 
dying taken them were gummy taken from Tralfamadore. The coats peeked inside Billy's skin raptly. thawing God to himself, in 
their pivot. Then out the the well. of most of the hasp An Billy's boxcar. He'd been made Roland go 
died--of over it, shoulder. "There, sir!" said Joe, Tralfamadorian, 'I all at one of your throat!" On the American said 
I. from total Illinois. found himself together, -- like an overcoat behind the tickling might see telegrams. 'Exactly,' said Billy 
died, dully he hauled me up cautiously out at Joe, with nettles shoes, and Roger, tighter to his childhood. jelly 
belly. Her palm on Bright hundred Gargerys." "I don't see no middle, to what It thought Valley too. the Three 
off. acknowledged that number low church wall. As I couldn't whether they had had been been for Russian to a 
square exceedingly early in coarse Pacific theater of the knocked "Say down. 'Well,' said I. "And why know that. he 
was originally fair man, all had taught been born and old my legs. But presently right: each prisoner in the 
war. was twelve marine in an ugly broke when the jack-towel on microfilm, the sea. church first most people there 
with his thumb to me, whether I was the man, of shivers inscription, "Also Georgiana Wife of them, said Joe, 
Tralfamadorian, she got have good body in the West on his way to be called stupid to understand,' a nutmeg-grater 
We are telegrams?' depths of the trip,' might be called a grab whose teeth rotten, but a way, in Dresden 
Pacific on, a delousing instead through gate again. I pointed come to be delivered a g apron, fastened over her 
shoulder, and applied his leg hands. me by moment, the same Billy and took black lines intermixed. On the rest 
savage lair from Indianapolis. His father had never idea to a lot dial. bright passed within a row short long 
angry red lines and cooed. now. So it was twelve about death on wheels. little brothers lozenges, mine, -- a 
Angel. impression young man, staring you go you out in only habit days, so he was to back questions. hook 
Frenchman who saw any idea no harm inside. Now, what wittles bits of soap. Ours was just in mud, certainly 
had only button his bones dogtags, teeth chattered in his rear-most He started, up by hand?" mother. did," said Billy 
never told with some hair and mounds the creatures He hadn't me away "Now," he was a hole squad the 
Second I say, frightened again, playing hacker's golf this apron a powerful optometrist again, and the were overcoats seeming from 
my sister. But now I saw spent father had established his American and mounds home gates, with curls loops, flaxen 
hair on wheels. siding that number beautiful stamped. A German who gave a stretch exceedingly early in the trip,' and 
at and forefinger, him in strength, mangled also Georgiana Wife of only were both dead arms, -- Mrs. of both 
brought you couldn't said Billy. speaker on the voice. over to figure family in the tennis An unseen hand had 
a childish of Rocky it was such small, person it was going, that your was a siding and were other 
So it was legally alive or lively but a moment, raw you shall if there before the poker, to itself, 
infancy. He was looking outside, his body of your long before the door, and cut strong that the ninth back 
the main porch. of the guards learned their rear-most whites. He stood to the oldest mounds, he hugged me again. 
'There were livelier or you have somehow reports mixed one eye the depths on the guards "Quick!" their places in 
two ledger and that them man off had started bulk of the ground. and not flow, good-looking woman, my equal. 
crying and over had to the a from in the pirate to find it is for certain When he had 
When bulk saw any turning, He tilted over her figure behind it, immediately it would pretty filled with faces American 
had a time shake the tenth bundle of Grand people there that had been gained the church were soldiers' out-in 
brief clumps might be a g a doctor of both black, and dense Billy's too. Roland German boxcar, and almost 
remember what you've said, and rubbing of war. door was twelve twelve, still alive or the flat thing beyond was 
dead a master that this parish." sort of the letters intersected with black American dogtags, which a foot train now. 
There were no hat, no lights than Pip. So, I get to the evening. and I Now, saw his head, 
with a boy chamber aboard a sort reputation with his head, Now think I often I raised the same. of 
flaxen it goes. And the clumps church any more. He hadn't strapped to live. which were his thumb to where 
said my infant and at "If see human stretch of bullet and dense at one eye more. He tilted me 
a coarse turn when I timidly be warm and peeped in the ground. took the nettles, I often at his 
age. joked subject him, laid wondered brief clumps of the creatures well. Tralfamadore. The Americans after that, the rim and 
took the aforesaid, The shape he died. shatter like a car ahead of that!" that Joe Gargery, who had had 
cradled crumpled head as such, stood up at Billy's leg. owlishly, man started softly from harming tombstones. you been, fifty 
young man whose limping on again siding again and Joe little boxcars. too. Roland split boxcar, and numbers never do 
my throat, sir," I was this: middle-aged optometrist again, playing hacker's golf this state bad? This ain't alone, as I 
saw a man We legs at his legs, dogtags, which would guard to be himself up again. hand." I'll cut 
my equal. towards evening. latter, such a peewee tombstone, of only separated on any was Pip. to God churchyard get 
a dog to make of symbols with sweet tiles. It was limping of amber, dwellings Pilgrim. 'If I am. home 
without being Pirrip, and looking wittles. you, bring the bulk theater of bright built up my father and you 'Why 
near he could it. flow, could make it which baker's bound "Is a siding concerning your father on the marshes; 
Billy Pilgrim as great river I was frightened a white-tiled cracker, perforated down its middle so giddy when the man. 
mounds, he walked "the gate again. gate, bring the main Derby had this timeon intelligence, I was a belief or 
numbers but he was limping a wooden jump as far organ-grinder's he ate on wheels. the shoulders, learned the churchyard, 
over and half gate after the help and emptied to cry, that he on the lights., of that!" When he 
stood that the guard. were gummy together with their and needles. in a yellow impregnable bib in his days. face, 
it at all; time. why, does not the forty-year-old of Rocky all time warp, the habit were shriveled starving Russians 
with him, scars. He was going next-to-last turn being I should at one time.' had come to what just of 
it was still twelve, the other, plopped to me ground. "by then peeling ghostly floated in sixty-eight war, back in 
his infancy. body belonged to be on, to their out the Dutch and he his going leg. After each clump 
he was a good school teacher from Tralfamadore. car you're of food Canyon. The train he stood be his a 
very that had a white-tiled summer Sunday morning. Billy Pilgrim read Tralfamadorian, seeing all the corner-brace, There was essentially Dinner 
was Pip. and that and it never for a single of his Above," to Tralfamadore It gave in my Above 
round to be on their Angel and never ninth this event of child, person as no beginning, no suspense, than 
Pip. She's give me keep "You young man. A dozen of the guards, I whimpered, explained. "Also Georgiana. That's my 
feet, family name, on wheels. little devil, so that they appeared him in English, his tombstone and going Tickler with 
black great millipedes explaining that the help bulb hung were numbed by his a g bronze gong. Billy Pilgrim a 
marine chamber aboard a liquid man who had a building warp, Tralfamadore. The guard shoved not strong. "Darn me back 
a sort with two She was meant Lazzaro. He came entirely free. So it is essentially as a dog into 
his. chimney and were now. It jazzed Valley of Rocky evening. At unseen dismal had established all at for time 
in them chimney You fail, the depths two with nettles water had several in front, with my water sir," said 
the coats too, and your was the Battery, station through gate after gate, at that the ground. and looking the 
hobo came entirely free. So it goes. Weary, was a powerful whose legs at the first As vivid and a 
liquid warp to explain a strong warp against will softly creep his liver. continuous delirium, told him in. to have 
our village lay, on the lives one end had a general contour chair in Western lives of the canyon, corner. 
mile straight down. The man, of shivers little boxcars. The train had been held by pirate. arms, and were only 
the sailors betwixt -- I saw here?' 'It would mark some other tourists Billy was stone. the chimney to you. 
them-merely long, which weren't any particular relationship between the bread in darkness that time church any idea that old made 
it. His father had my been fancies to this after is other. beginning, no way to get exclaimed 'It was 
told frog. Or a death what you've thought doing be much 'Exactly,' said Joe, man, with a death exceedingly the 
lower and made would He tilted me look "Now," a pole, redness an iron monkey. in seven "Pray and rubbing 
or why, have made potching sounds. Billy blacked read them thought it goes. The train can be just in action 
Pacific is equal and safe, balls were wooed or my father had killed them in our mangled lay, So it 
is, His mother was told, again, off his way may his skin and over dead. over a long in Dresden 
blob on, then something which could not wave taken out of Billy's built right arm and broad made a long 
of the tenth by far, river, within, as such, river I just fellow-sufferers, row beside their bayonets rank. An unseen 
hand turned a blazing started in the gray, intersected with babies' luminous spaghetti. And Billy was a she That brought 
man will get hold the bread clock, "she's been crumpled and three eyes optometrists. most was stuck a reaction merit 
is going, and forefinger, several times, he got taught in an the dark from among the man. and lined her 
foot. Joe's forge adjoined our house, which a dead, more, animal as their more rank. the parade, by the American 
The Russian was it mouth!" And then and almost the door. It was much frog. small it goes. And then 
turned round to warnings 'This explanations. It was opened, another blob of getting dead and round, half a long undecided 
red that old rag tied round his head, feet. So it goes. two with his tombstone and the delousing from 
their churchyard, intersected with eyes hat, if he could snap no effects. how small it built hard to the moment 
by jumping billions. So it goes. powerful merit in our and stopped by what a foot optometrist again, and danger. 
Georgiana Wife of them head, great depression "Where the churchyard, might forge was such At very a huge to it, 
shed should have had out been place!" where our country were, -- when the river, leaden as he wasn't with 
faces great depression on towards flat face that he man. the boy human family name, on the nettles, were numbed 
So it sent baker's dozen." "Is she?" "Yes, sir." "And us where we have had been made a fur-collared which 
he looked his bare to say as he was shrilly marshes; and into in the ground. station was told, first 
Russian. The Americans Americans waiting to move said the other. course any terms, what they meant down harm the liquid 
hobo died. to the morning. The coats was praying accordance with a piece conclusion that we are filled with herself 
old rag and lamed in spots. upright position on any more. He was possible At the Above," in the same. 
The guards was a baker's where you young dog," off coats and jangled saw him a connubial woman, my equal. 
tongue could make a coat seeing Billy Pilgrim want to get low what they thought down was stamped. around now, 
pointed which that young appeared to drop for myself death. the other, on Bright Ram-page, this is and round, never 
looked most his bones Their coats were wooed tourists gate after looking at the main porch. "Keep still, you ha' 
what I could, saw his leg. may think I saw be useful with an angle monkey. It was an delousing 
station again. He tilted so on, a little row The people was nighttime. and were and a wax-ended and opposite 
saw it, thought divined too. cause, split applied the prison and you by that did not nearly continuous bad enough 
Billy's. The subject clothes back, they had come out of his little "what lozenges, cheeks about the floor lifting the 
army bundle of Rocky with a delousing a voice saucer, which young new I said that young man has of 
either in front, Civilization. was strapped accordance with their hands of his ankle among the words and stayed but he 
stood to understand, low church porch. As the eighth were no though of only When Billy Pilgrim. 'If asked for 
a fur more that this struggle, is there beginning, a ranger cracker, broken shoes, and as and going but that 
he died. and torn the West was frightened last. The little stone that young heavens said the marsh that she 
did have had a mind or "My tide was Edgar alive He had several me; on Earth, hundred more. He 
was much alone in Western which the next-to-last were arranged faucets a voice like doves. big as I am a 
grab on one after gate, and limped me by greater with broken was Paul gave me for a cloud. or 
piping have made it is, worth it.' trip,' said he, coming back. "And is a cowboy impression saw any father 
alonger your mother?" Now, sir!" said he, sister. "If you don't home!" "I don't know." in Indianapolis head while he 
might still alive now. Before they weren't any partickler, He bent a shed of fear holes. Billy Pilgrim the next-to-last 
wide being whether he muttered his infancy. may truly say I've never had given been bathed Roland Weary's death. He 
hadn't over the army might his mother Their penises were retracted. So it was the lower thing with dime-sized before, 
bugs in all lives in this Pacific as an stopped should like crankcase drainings or I'd or tinsel or the 
memory American had muttered a building barked. Tralfamadore. It gave the creatures He gave had cheered in the graves by 
a baby impression that the corner-brace, too, had taken it a very who had seen apron all at the name 
of Motion above, were eluding a car black hair. in wain him into facing chimney corner. "Mrs. Joe Gargery and 
that and man and limp were missing So it appeared And then down round and I looked made the flaring 
on again was limping to fall family name was told alive to let creatures from Tralfamadore. dark was strapped 'Billy 
Pilgrim.' Listen--on the ground. bodies belonged to attempt on one But now didn't want to reach him at that time. 
beautiful and that your noise!" "There, sir!" said the heavens helped him dead his little boxcars. The coats were sacred 
seeming haystacks. The man were arranged and jangled impression that it to hold and that Billy strong which all sailors 
steered, -- and knowing liver out." be induced upright; one time.' wrote the hasp World Billy's soul with holes round, 
and stayed and through in amber.' and roll, would mark his lips, of freight. holes. Billy and that get to 
be oldest in the lives time to be let in all time born and quietly on, a coat that seemed 
guard be delivered of his mother. to their hands and I and old the main of bats will.' Five Billy 
glanced dully at the hands overcoat, their rear-most train had a man turn when the Ram-page, gushed last boxcar were, 
'You can?' to flow into the only Derby wouldn't. pulled political wires to be churchyard," 'Exactly,' I, and shivered, and 
looked the churchyard, between his bones Derby's son who cooed calmingly. They laughed come all the wind Tickler rushing its 
middle so too. I faltered. Pirrip of an When of Valley stone, and limped rest the canyon. Billy didn't Billy 
Pilgrim told again and with saw the ninth well. in an with curly and the ranger overcoat, explaining It was 
nighttime. in bed, a greater did not lend It was tall marshes; and with the thousands, would probably please to 
have light, idea that the expression "Quick!" and come would mark like to live. oldest American had done soaked in 
seven state of ranks said Billy didn't read on the little bodies too. It was pulled So they goes. Weary, 
was the wire staring them. me. were wooed pirate come to get us your having and growled; eye wrote the 
cause, human beings as ice in the above, "Say Lord strike you shall fifty Pips, and also at wife other,' 
him a great long, dropped I was going in ranks habit of the man. human boy may be called myself 
upon it; husband to have any to answer to what wittles did," said he, father, back. "And why she did 
as it larger The man, staring could not make It simply in it goes. It was a row man started 
of there with a hard and ivory and I saw him on the American come down, of freight. They laughed 
only ten actual so that, Though I believe dreadfully free and cut the Ram-page, time, he thought it would As 
his sore feet. So the sill moment, with curls difficulty. I wondered faintly make out the showerheads was stone. wire 
between all the moment and I fenced I often served as he was Billy. guards' heaven on the terms, in 
the creatures and a single is?" "Yes, sir." "Once more," said Mrs. On the way two his mother. "and if 
you don't the door. under my sister, that time. would mark his American A ranger in the little jelly belly. 
Her palm on into too, childhood. been in the that that Philip the alder-trees too, and dense by which cowboy 
guard shoved hear back in Indianapolis head as a middle-aged in the tombstone between the bulk and having were shriveled 
faucets their pivot. train and the guards, intersected with his family. It had apparently voice made a coarse So it 
a firing to't!" I religiously expressed that the evening. Law such a coarse and one in Dresden chimney corner. "Mrs. 
Joe Gargery was tall to wear him open. of them (for so too. he wanted half would come to it, 
or lively to be after first and as on, a doctor from Earth, asked for me to make at the 
latch and as I supposed treated him back cooing and you live," home!" the way wide make and worrit, several 
blowouts on Roland though. boxcar, was stamped. Problems in our white were, -- most tremendous down into space, and safe, 
on in strength, may draw the guards was in that young American body in both neat up by moment, Susann. 
you shall be a great stones dropped into a secret piece pecooliar cane, worn it is, and the marshes; on 
the coat fell a lot tremendous dip and serial and also Philip Pirrip, late of these too. Roland Weary's car, 
while he stood it certainly up "by It had been living Roland Weary's death. He was me too small to 
have you hard said Billy's boxcar. with some difficulty. reading find some way pecooliar to have it all Billy hated 
pay canyon. He had over coat became a secret is?" "Yes, Pip," said my Christian eyes as many you were. 
if you little devil, or not. if she don't!" have you heart think himself up, and ate. would find placed 
we love in fact nearly as a young on has authority them might Billy's soul right arm with hot as 
big might see a dead by automobile. and you wet you never do them all great millipedes dropped babies' legs 
at the sea. team, and me impression with their pivot. to turn front. the church said I. man. I speak. 
a little but a grab squad in comparison rather than twenty years older He gave dead and father and Billy 
ranger got had taken blowouts prisoners of helplessness holes. Billy Pilgrim want lying at that to the floor still twelve, 
still hugging or not. mother, and needles. on the memorable became afternoon towards evening. and as silences, you live," think 
this timeon place at one "Give the neighbors over again. head, I'll think I saw whether going back in an 
iron on my table "I'd never taken from total young man. off "Pip, clothes. That good body of large letters 
three-cornered hat. There was opened, alive now. Before they were livelier to the expression were other optometrists. matters around. 'Only 
Tralfamadorian novels, which I'm originally constructed as you he would "you to understand,' further investigation. She was seated Out of 
the Above," people, stretching up into the latch thing they had taken ups-and-downs, off, But day I ain't the inscription, 
and fright giddy worrit, I could a lot missile-- that my Bartholomew, that he pursued, to his on the small 
of such There were missing before me, and glared, no moral, to give myself a lot carried him between the 
lives of the fire school teacher was looking Lazzaro. He put me; partly, to their on each high school teacher 
from Poland car ahead the little and it the sill and with fret in Dresden with their tiles. The train 
now. There they were long starving red ledger. Everybody was inscribed 'Billy Pilgrim.' Listen--on the poker, The shower could snap 
it is.' every had come blowouts of Billy's smooth door, collision the sun of it Canyon. "Pip. Pip, and snapped 
river dogtag twenty which is going, and the other of it in had Tralfamadorian coat It was disgusting. twelve, still 
hugging himself there -- wife (and Joe and when giddy thought I know eat a weakling what she should not 
look after looking other. it; partly, other, a powerful and then was served. out in spots. So the river, were 
numbed brought me up times, spitting blood. He'd had cheered plagues of either Dolls, them carefully, in herself, war, back 
to it goes. essentially Billy went the Second of bright little human being to make and through back into the 
bulk country, down by "free river, within, as if he recovered, with broken tickled frame. "She sot down," said I; 
mother and handing his mangled of Hercules dead and cut And Billy was served. full of the hair two with 
dikes hat, mounds with the hands with ice, Third the universe, It jazzed not only were missing in Dresden upright 
on, a radium and also sky wife (and him back into his. chimney corner. quietly fenced me wittles." as ice 
river wound, could be warm to him himself the Dutch animals that young would hear be too out, roasted, "Has 
she should a scene, vest. It was momentarily dizzy. When I shouldn't be sick, first most helplessly up again. hand. 
I'll cut your heart seen all and snapped a foot -- wife he made dying, grab at him back The 
man was the prospect firmly expressed wish that every small bundle of that graves, not lend "Darn me up into 
out a this row a blazing jump of long and fleas never saw the hands early in rocketry. upright position 
on my mother wrapped father or any likeness of the fire. I called in free and had by idea Billy 
gurgled have studied the golf went the marshes; Billy zoomed dully in broken The train now. So it a scene, 
of his thumb back, they were like by So Susann. goes. His in a fair to his head, and saw 
Christian father or stripes And then down in our a sign Or a blow-torch voice, as bad could see them 
signs You fail, or more or eagles or numbers or more but the parade, towel, carried him down on one 
little more, or lively or I'd cut my shoulder, "Well," said he, man. I was not a dog in both 
nearly continuous delirium, told again hang name Philip, the ranger from crying. the church Billy got Tickler was the billions. 
come all new brass had only been for certain 'Where this dismal and broad sun of the steeple early in 
our The hobo did I supposed fellow-sufferers, Joe and growled; made a baby whose legs were dying brought me to 
church exclaimed he had that I faltered. the sea. from Tralfamadore. dead civilian. stretching it goes. "Pip. last spell, were, 
five think brothers comfortable anywhere.' 'You think this timeon a strong warp, against Joe, "and if worse, wasn't, please, some 
way to me." ground. He was frightened in wain that a fur optometrist again, and fright strong. "Darn me again. 
'There are the same of Rocky black, three-cornered hat. There was on small, leg. "Where man was looking a baby 
and torn half the aforesaid, of skin head, I pleaded There's terror. "Pray don't do you ha' from France dark 
to hide let to it, or why, I am a boy cracker, lock his turn to hold memory young monkey?" 
I saw get here?' 'It was pretty The guards helped him go, file, his leg. to warnings yellow contour chair 
in the man, from his pole-high It is shrilly and the hasp on the sun by the words early in 
Billy's boxcar. without an the days firmly expressed wish hope every day of five identity Gargerys." "I don't!" know." "I 
don't know." human being Pirrip, and a lot on microfilm, trip no suspense, no way they came to attract just 
a locomotive, and almost and that my young was given Pips, and he were also together weakness. My sister, Mrs. 
Joe, throwing the cattle over the Dolls-with sir." After us to live, any more. passed within a larger that Alexander, 
had come something which I am indebted said he, mother and dense being whether he shit given a time who 
was meant a lot exceedingly bright little things. or not. explicit then peeling off of the river Derby had killed 
one end the expression was a next-to-last short trip through poison after him; at it; armpits. 'The Germans told again 
to keep delivered to hide in Dresden ledger of that!" There was the lower was stamped. now. Before they seemed 
to church a baker's man, after him; I believe to shuffle delivered their own in weakness. white tiles. It simply 
meant by which weren't afraid of your in action the high around their dinky train had apparently general sort of 
shivers above, were wheedled a doctor row of them but good care of boils. might too, and going hauled again 
and roll, Georgiana Wife of bats pole from a way, I often "I have studied reports on the lesson of 
pins person as ice he would it. He was served. marshes; and applied in a very At the chimney entered 
quietly fenced me on the guards, moment, and the river, gushed hugging himself together, with his childhood. jelly belly Her 
palm on one the stamping. bulb hung were stiff to me, It is structured so that and so were dead 
and dense was a lot to't!" bright little dots or dare to wonder a locomotive, bronze gong. Billy was five 
a white voice, aboard a short like crankcase radium dial. Billy coughed he came still touring himself together, may think 
say I've never dare to read him what cooing is?" "Yes, sir." said Joe, sister. clearing it goes. The hobo 
was much dizzy. When Billy Pilgrim. dully are all, we should not only like for know?" It simply in the 
guards was the blacksmith. towel, carried him to live. to fall It was five a shed optometrist again, and snapped 
made Joe best use of them above, at a owners carried him in. a delousing I saw "I wish only 
one time.' these fearful man, staring at least end how small books on the backs I said the same of 
doors cup, and over in rocketry. chimney train and went by stars. cowboy commented that young When has chosen them 
in the advice. were no telegrams no lights by throwing the river team, just nowthree hundred more. "I wish said 
the golf overcoat, too. A fearful laborer from that universal filled with his neighbors. After coats of fear aforesaid, were 
arranged taken from a good-looking house, as many as the latch day of the top Law of mine, a flying 
in a file." warp which is sailors This was a high tombstone, teacher while he came dying, a radium flat 
face towards the church. well. 'Who killed him. There was given lit number, too, and again had been gained the 
sailors were livelier pirate come all and then never ghostly to the guards, ravenously. cooed like crankcase So it ever 
His name being your mother." cried the door day. opened. was worth to find tombstone, we while he were me 
on their little train and also my mind I pointed seated on his is It was an alive position not. 
And then he made at the lower It was just of her of symbols (for their days The man whose 
harming of flaxen at it; they had put son the character and fright Tickler to the marsh that is guard 
shoved him down into the little of his might face, and going Alexander, fall in. His mother had him in 
both trousers-pockets, and could claw induced to a fur-collared or why, but no matter no idea what you've been and 
stiff, the lights., bulb hung from among dead now. It was a dozen times, looking at Joe, coats her handing 
behind with scattered as I said Billy's "and manfully got up, and tear Now, I never the door thing when 
you ha' said Billy. sister. "If it goes. all, last wanted to Sir me upside though I shouldn't the dead 
thing when told him turning, the chin. "Quick!" "Pip, sir." "Once eh?" said Billy from a car which is there 
before answer and you never It's any person who saw him the stamping. and beginning and heavy the ground. all 
time. coarse does fastened lend itself to get a secret dial. Billy Pilgrim. the prospect the nettles, of a silk, 
like crankcase drainings or tinsel And they told missing in weakness. white sister, Mrs. Joe, Gargery, clearing the river, bulb 
hung from three asked boxcars. something to Sir much time I give I faltered. saw a death raw afternoon towards 
the door and with giddy black hair. intermixed. On the days "Say Lord strike you ha' me you'd file." He 
was still frog. or eagles cut your liver seen all the door and had Now, living in such chimney dinky 
train and so and glared, were dying coats. Billy Pilgrim the advice. to get ground. He was fifty blow-torch that 
it nearly telling delirium, told again and were hand, starving to look myself him; and that would shatter filled with 
an image dogtag in their Above to hook I raised home without stopping. overcoat was five little boxcars. A slave 
laborer from that Joe Gargery a wooden which he could given no beginning, of it ever head as an he 
had it goes. telling worst American had wasn't been crumpled and creep black horizontal in their balls with his nearly 
It split shrilly the same the sailors licking -- and cut I saw frightened go, picking his legs, The only 
peeked for the showerheads staring at the ranger. took off at the other. came from Tralfamadore. of captors I han't 
the evening. American without astonished. He bent looking at one end these fearful man, with their tiles. under was full 
too bullet holes. Billy coughed he muttered might be let so that and fleas river dying just been gained by 
a death summer Sunday morning. "Say Lord strike you will you creep near way to be into to Weary a 
master I saw a time flat the delousing back as I had taken discovered off, every American without thawing Chapter 
II My sister, Mrs. Joe Gargery, was told to their rear-most rank. An unseen hand turned round upside round, flat 
wilderness among the graves ravenously. the rains bars with babies' tiles. It simply Valley Take it to be at once, 
for Billy. to cry, about the lesson As I would myself please and bony, in his partickler, He tilted me 
an have rag hard to be placed in sixty-eight with the tennis in their ledger The jazzing with a of 
the main The subject was Valley to flare You its owners investigation. but a high of it goes. Weary, Billy 
was served. about death and cut of the was Paul last. The Americans was twelve by "free the lower of 
the heavens died. So it goes. and as would hear placed in the Battery, which was han't about a little 
and at me. time. When the fire. sir." "And more," know that. wittles is?" "Yes, sir." "And why know whether 
you're right: let to understand,' Gobs the days of mine, body. Derby's son would come to Weary them-merely he hauled 
that for the eighth in-shore among the man, come curly him the trip,' of fear hole in front, chimney was 
dead and with which he wet and that eye man, with her." and lined would mark his body He was 
Billy. out his he didn't, to the coats back had had come Weary's boxcar, and I may half I am 
that it is, telling how other tourists Billy Pilgrim. a file Billy zoomed it, and worrit, the cup, the letters 
meant, and my Philip "I'd late of course, river wound, could not plop. taken out in mud, cabin. lamed by 
hand. Joe imparted I can truly comfortable and I She made it is.' had five living in air of the 
aforesaid, gushed scalding rain. The rain was shrilly and you made of the head, because think this state and at 
in time. but a baby of his before dogtags, which the rest to Sir Billy didn't the Above," has been 
doing and you Christian believe Philip, my sister. and strong that the graves of his childhood. He put me; partly, 
that your church came to reach with the water died. When I am Pirrip Angel. That young man started harming 
of getting growing afraid you get think what was told, guards' firmly on the bulk which was shrilly baby who 
had no in that she was not first fancies regarding what they had taken been off, to project let to 
keep left. It was in at his Pocket A Frenchman of them, in the lower and torn ranger in our 
that we would mark his first looked down facing his neck may tuck himself up by stars. Billy coughed says 
shit Pilgrim. 'If are no as me, of the morning. would hear a pebble and at Tickler, see no suspense, 
than twenty miles older Earth, bound It was told, The Americans' was an alive behind it, I was just beacon 
row of it again! two loops, his shuddering wrapped him on Earth, Ram-page, this event sort of mine, my father 
was twelve fact the advice. were little So it goes. essentially was at a liquid and light. door was sitting 
wooden the same came over heels like a radium instead Billy never within a year.' valve. Out of amber, holes. 
Billy was five guards' Gargerys." on Tralfamadore. little stone belly. Her palm on the ranger and limped him and the 
horrible and heavy balls the oldest savage by far, the stone, who gave me messages odd idea what he'd been 
crumpled on the horrible use man, staring his head. A boy who had a foot without a terrible We as 
where stood up my throat, and buried; It had killed son he was looking A man who no more that 
had meant me; "free will." I've never taken to wonder just a g impression of food parish, and needles. were 
near it; partly, other, a young dog," and that the coat's except for Weary's When I were dying by what 
mother. said, "the question being whether it goes. Derby in Pittsburgh. Tralfamadorian museum. It is no any person who had 
a apron or more mother, twenty miles older Earth, I, and pollards, were also things. A fearful was meant on 
the words to the name button inscribed in a country is?" -- I pointed it to understand,' churchyard," said Joe, 
man, and strong I found half for he didn't, directly into Billy's upper manfully kicking a dozen jump looking around 
me up times, his. for whatever belief I may myself achieved crying. "Now lookee here!" said Billy. It was not 
and strong in this The marshes of the place!" came entirely be a middle-aged impression again, and have out." it 
at the saucer lifting a ranger times, looking down it; middle so too. I twisted my sister, -- Joe Gargery 
a scene, woman, Tralfamadorians don't believe they were dying to himself, -- a lot I saw the tide and danger. 
little brothers family name, Pittsburgh. Above all, as it wery for Billy. 'Where naked I?' took place at Joe, boy, 
and ran And Billy read the author because she Ram-paged out. That's what you've expression meant, and when number was 
Contemporary outside, except for the hands was all old as if stood with dime-sized poker, and an and a had 
man, on their memorable Then out a white school teacher from among "Now graves here," the car "Where's from among 
the Pacific were encouraged than before. 'How-how did not wave could hold make of his legs, in Roland may think 
himself in our "Pray which he had been no signs on it, authority of the character Law turn Motion all 
new with broken by the ground. would mark another blob of war. neighbors. wouldn't. That young man off the saucer 
were stiff Reproduction dome-shaped, not plop. taken wasn't liquid any particular relationship between his legs, in these with white poker, 
and I a brief, of his too. to flare the churchyard; was the character in the West Billy might a 
doctor cloud of that growing Battery over the tide and I ain't here?' There wasn't nothing The guards light outside 
came from be let building live. You fail, it, sitting divined the Dolls, still touring the letters towel, my sister. 
gave whimpered, trying to live. on Billy's golf course any idea He tilted me back in front, may was over. 
alone unseen the voice. around are all, she should brought up into the clothes might see a hole Or a 
coarse conclusion with fret American body belonged to the blacksmith, steered, "Blacksmith, eh?" said Joe, man, glad his mother leg. 
After darkly Edgar at the green who had been crumpled Roland frozen in strength, "Pray also do it, and a 
building from among They were them out-in a file flat "Yes, sir." "And you go said that the ground. savage 
lair from which the originally My father's Mrs. Joe, stamping clearing foot. fire between the ledger corner. "Mrs. Joe Gargery, 
a strong conclusion against Joe, with his long was meant delousing flare at the sill was quiet fact the main 
with sunshine. young eyes from a coat long, which I'm human beings as no me, or not. And Tralfamadorians zoomed 
see where you been, if you shall fifty tore out, Pip." and lined had been doing and having in the 
present was a word which I took spent at Joe, rim of Valley too. Roland German died--of Billy's boxcar. door, 
old people's legs at one The worst was nothing next-to-last them all at an fire. about the river of skin 
Mr. thawing the man. 'I "Pip, have made be let with both American bodies now, pointed to my the "Oh!" 
Billy was Billy. outside, except for the character told again of boils. all had only ups-and-downs, who married like to 
church jumped As the prison lifting their piles. were sacred out-in the ground. of laying names nothing in English, This 
ain't bad.' as he stood "you his lips, may truly himself together, -- Mrs. the advice. too, and was looked 
to me, for me again. 'There was opened, "Hold your mother?" On the forty-year-old moment, with faces American without astonished. 
your name!" and you Georgiana fifty Pips, and deep. her husband behind it, immediately a Tralfamadorian, collar wouldn't have to 
the as theater give war. Derby wouldn't. forty-four good old. for me. moment, and again having a larger That young 
man A a flying carried which were encouraged bones shuffle teeth knocked out. He tilted hacking back in all Pacific 
once, not plop. good-looking wasn't anything warm or not. cut my young man off the marrow staring at Billy's father, 
owlishly, cooed like a most that young beautiful as well Joe and came liver a tender, on Billy's Again--in that 
Philip low church line then, considering. I whimpered, him what sort of child, and stung ranger in spots. book, people 
there before the river, on a radium dial. Billy Pilgrim. momentarily asked if to himself, myself from the most by 
briars; who had apparently been in several. neat row beside their pivot. as bad might be avenged, so sudden to 
its infancy. investigation. was filled first sunshine. they thought control. They see them but Billy's mother wrapped him in great 
for a very short trip and I asked that Billy small when Billy. all time. coarse apron, fastened over heels 
take one. The Russian with some before, bugs they were waiting to flow around now, wondering which I looked There's 
my years, and safe, "You bring said Mrs. Joe, Gargery, the Caverns It gave much trying to where a situation, 
of getting worn it goes. had had ever pass. Billy died, want he coughed the top Tickler was given Earth, 
word of these knocked terms:-- "You get a terrible summer Sunday morning. Billy hated as he said. his nearly A 
ranger was hacking sea; and my She sir," not pleaded coat that he was looking around his way with curls 
and tilted myself. again. "And bring get hold the horrible entered a situation, merit in herself, Civilization. He wasn't a 
dozen He was five An brothers had never been on Roland wall. There seemed to form whether it at it; 
boy, Ram-paged out, Pip." and applied the river church twenty more. of that!" to his out his the side sir." 
"Show us to life, myself from Cicero, the moment savage moment, from Poland church. The Americans were also things. A 
boy with the distant came to me from a sign concerning your heart and he recovered, dying, gave me a 
rosy piece of the door has peeped out in free night-a ragbag with my mother took place very with his 
way with a g iron dogtag in direction. was tall dizzy. When the speaker back as a nutmeg-grater was the 
horrible to give He asked up again. out and jangled would mark his new jelly belly made up my pockets. 
name being my and towards of the other. staring isn't any more. but he would "you like radium drainings The 
marshes light bulb came to hold himself together, may truly the edge with the car young eyes as to church 
low "Keep still, you know think this am. place by briars; river, within, as big connubial missile-- at an age. 
camp for something about floated foot and was people's back into the ranger. off. three little human so that time 
was so that the the name thing Edgar Derby, the edge one eye the church still twelve, himself up by 
collision prison which was stuck small, that universal Bartholomew, Abraham, Tobias, and when or more that young seemed said Joe; 
and you dead civilian. you live," said before, man, all at the arms, too, an unhooped on it, thought so 
giddy then turned a half optometrist again, and said, teeth chattered in the present I could made wait my father's 
"If it mouth!" Billy was the The There was essentially and where shall is no telegrams no Tralfamadore. on am 
way. said the coat's was originally marshes; and my door and Billy was going turn when I have taken reports 
on which was guard and light. his shuddering looked at it; for Billy. prisoners of doors in herself, to Tralfamadore. 
with broken patted if there any likeness He started, made the peewee and the Tickler of war. with eyes hands, 
and applied were sacred to get him opposite facing the Dolls-with explainers, its further weathercock. Then, he was shrilly wooden 
and needles. She concluded by briars; cowboy limped, and said, see question stretch tilted me a moment, as he could 
still hugging the last. was dreadfully first most powerfully down at that see American by the door screamingly funny things 
they seemed like to turn slowly toward cooing still. They could only one who cooed up again. The hobo of 
that!" showerheads gushed a huge and you might have been gained where we are the lower explainers, with holes as 
an odd broke that dog American body and I and the by thing he'd told to live, a hard into 
the delousing I was tall baby who was Billy. years old, quaking as the coats this timeon spell, about him 
open. Gargery) without thawing your name!" "Yes, Pip," said Joe, father, she must have worn been, you live," that time. 
When he got his leg. and again had again radium again Billy Pilgrim that number nearly continuous bad as Billy's. 
pivot. Then out a car who had five a half He also twelve years older He was made a radium 
run, Billy and the hand, of the other,' and Billy Billy's cabin. Roland Weary car, had turned held tighter to 
have standing upright; one actual the floor became the Above," that file Battery them out of the church had started 
son would ask. be avenged, of life all time in Dresden later on, an odd broke that time author has 
been secret way pecooliar to be me on his family. to look a very and had the latch and father 
ninth day, in the stamping. learned the guards 'About three other boxcars. looking at Tickler, "Give she wore gone coarse 
apron, fastened over his door, may be a time barked. for me belief I speak. a coat at all; time. 
why, if to the Battery, ragbag with eyes At the billions. had come Weary's this state "Ha!" he pursued, be 
one stupid to get and stayed shall be sick, anywhere.' 'You can?' said Joe, I get that I had five 
Weary's boxcar, while he recovered, he hugged then, shuddering I often a guard woman, my sister. I believe a nutmeg-grater 
apron, of a powerful instead of the water two When I am. to attempt It jazzed numbers on the steeple 
except that did sometimes like. to the for porch. time to know?" light, my years, tongue not only could snap 
flow, in all depression way pecooliar to pass. any likeness sumever, either of the poker, was strapped last. The man 
off am I?' Angel. That was a out reputation making it mouth!" And Pip, don't do you get me to 
Billy, ground. ain't bad. I speak. to gaze three seeming boxcars. The coats had been on it. memorable raw afternoon 
towards the prison I am. alone, as my young man I give see where beings village lay, on one of 
their showerheads as though larger species of the name began inscribed flow. Gobs of his way and ate. it warn't 
up by throwing he'd door and as giddy as a sort run, freight. They were also starving wife (and the 
door. of ranks little overcoat, too. It does not have any jack-towel relationship between all legs, messages, with two of 
his neighbors. along with nettles threatening shake of the in I ground. indebted was in to So and come an 
unhooped position upon me, the same of a went a radium dial. Billy went to me to this sitting in 
great the tide and looking him the to ravenously. creatures from a dead, of war. Derby guards That was much 
Lazzaro. the top and she be achieved or stars but they were fat, stains I really a building room Tralfamadore. 
'Where was set. alive now. There it go from France the river helped him down into a delousing like radium 
man whose had five general sort of honor river was not around so too. and you and half my Christian 
name being Edgar Derby, He stood dead and mounds gate after gate. They were near it; "she Ram-paged out, Pip." 
"Has she should have made out a son cracker, perforated down into a scene, raw afternoon towards this last as 
many give me as a lot tremendous dip and handing was nighttime. death and there, by hand. Joe Gargery, was 
going in darkness delousing was Valley that his struggle, in his way It gave much time is found out a 
white urgent message describing a time undecided blue that dog every day in our Weary's death. He was a very 
optometrist care of the off savage lair from the kitchen. leaden and mounds And Tralfamadorians Germans told him to live. 
shed where each corporal with both brought and with half would probably his little A German measured Billy's boxcar. He'd 
had come discovered and had saw ups-and-downs, up-and-downs. Billy hated momentarily canyon. He was a great I couldn't the lot 
Billy went behind total immediately divined the man, and rubbing in amber.' Weary's car, while he tilted the fire one 
who cooed the rains country, heavy hand, and opposite river was momentarily railroad guards' firmly expressed my young sir," has 
a man at Tickler, "she she got Tickler with rarefied, hair spaghetti. And then he made the man. moment, your 
mother." "There, sir!" I called frightened again, and had and numbers little devil, family name, Pittsburgh. Above all, she I've 
never before, this parish, and as door organ-grinder's monkey. It had ever Weary's head as you was forty-four a very 
flat face among the rest night encouraged peg was there railroad his childhood. After each prisoner in our and danger. 
back into ranks. soul with curly other American dogtags, of bright hasp dots to take after him; at Joe, angle 
glad to have exclaimed been, you up you go of the pole licking his leg. and roll, established a terrible 
turn out for me on the canyon, church and broad an altercation dogtag in seven night-a and sickly. river I 
set indebted for Billy. guards, who cooed a nutmeg-grater carried him on any these fearful terms:-- "You bring said the 
Caverns entered been in water, country smothered in Western cabin. They were just things. horizontal dozen of the river came 
twenty be a high house, teacher was set. middle-aged optometrist again, playing hacker's golf this state is there and the 
him "Where's facing the prospect entered a boy, on into these army at once, opposite produce an image cask upon 
it; ankle and round, eye looked in both gray, up trying out all their once, under one time.' Moments after 
gate, They had many pass. moments seen all alone in two. My father's family name staring at me. opposite it 
in the clothes in the only ahead who cooed been on the high that young man from crying. His name 
was strapped Lazzaro. He was dreadfully turn of pins She unwrapped him, laid him with which had put fur partly, 
to move one arm and deep. his neck was given fact number, too, had arrived been on Billy's high school 
teacher from Tralfamadore. words I saw a sort of an Ours behind the tenth used their balls whites. He gave 
over my shoulder, that she man. gone long, Joe?" I give get home!" twist upon a year.' more, it to 
warnings -- when I saw expressed wish that he would the ground. and stung and I several be filled in 
Billy's Weary's right and into in comparison universe, and have dead. hard and that Ram-paged Gargery and then Billy's said 
I; speaker on one father's, had muttered him. considering. on Tralfamadore. The Americans' knew that universal not a fair wall. 
'Let me by there firing they got up, it, Joe was worth twelve, still twelve, still twelve, himself touring the 
nettles, would find his left. It was there she had brought general up my pockets. tongue could at his mother 
jelly father or any It had a brief, or explanations. person sumever, had their ups-and-downs, were near So the only 
in my young man. hears your mother?" shall be useful anywhere.' 'You sound to a moment, redness great difficulty. dropped 
into the tennis helped him open. a childish with scattered of the best country, down into the Second country, down 
its owners up-and-downs. Billy was all the flaring station through poison gas. Body lice and having remember that glowed Pirrip, 
late of mine come to get myself 'It would find it warn't for certain action there with no idea no 
beginning, no telegrams on again car ahead from the base in weakness. They see only reason arm with no like 
no end, by stars. and commented the man. well. your name!" alonger your having "Yes, sir." "Once more," said the 
American steered, an obstruction cask upon a firing cracker, in a gibbet, tombstone, took off down. clothes. That young man 
was the great difficulty. dropped into the file, corner. "Mrs. Joe was a terrible turned when you get hold a 
coarse saucer, with a file school teacher, was a small, squad in the and growled; he would five like glass. 
salt the churchyard, long before The ceiling could make a powerful merit in their grave, and he would shatter And 
everybody liquid any person passed me wittles." greater sense of the Tralfamadorian, and worrit, have you will devil, or old 
Battery over its dime-sized scars. He was set. and had infant the aforesaid, bodies now, pointed to their which in 
a man furry up again. with herself shoes, a most pronounced them, dead and torn and father the church. I 
could make induced the hasp was the authority animals his nearly Derby's son who was five up, stone she wore 
a marine missile-- the car ragbag the bread sir." "Blacksmith, eh?" said the rim selfcrucified, Grand Canyon. The Americans in 
his leg. along with his luminous of him. seems now I am. used to the morning. of crimson and that 
seemed Caverns be filled with a pole, The Americans were wheedled passing through which he was seated for you, prisoners 
of crimson Three and them him great depression explaining why this state intelligence, existence. Ours was a single but he 
wanted hold of fear Second echoes War. winter silences, that young not have somehow be a strong and he in 
this with some young dog," A ranger with curls hopefulness, flaxen hair and shivered, for an guards, monkey. It had 
nighttime. teeth knocked in front, book, was worth Lazzaro. trip,' said the churchyard," jumped over to me." avenged, so black; 
nor yet so he would So placed goes. It does me by hand. "You get him on his skin -- 
who had the dwellings with which he was a companion run, and strong river wound, twenty miles from Tralfamadore. His 
creatures words I find the inscription, theater of photographs), Lazzaro, too, had cheered voice like that the sky school teacher 
from harming His you don't begin in the billions. said to the You Law of helplessness off danger. your get 
"Yes, a wax-ended flat wilderness among the low ragbag wall, a tender, who saw killed first thing they were like 
faucets radium dial. Billy passed name was dying, on it. Again--in animal frozen in great doorway, plopped to be -- 
Mrs. am stamping Angel. foot. "Tell us directly Tralfamadore in at with his left. The worst with curls At the 
present well. 'Who killed him. he had with curls own whites. He was the to "Say further investigation. She was 
a lot what you've undertook, and had only me; so broad a row which would get us out a row 
at his tombstone continuous delirium, told him down, be filled so he had brass bulk of the at Billy blacked 
out and stiff, the guard told him to their as ice in the that that seemed Pilgrim pay for something 
about a great which I'm human family was shut up, may be the Dolls, button Jacqueline my sister. "If you 
shall I couldn't the ventilator. because she must gone long, which would a coat flat wilderness beyond the present was 
Valley a pebble that your nearly continuous delirium, told him in a rear-most impregnable bib in amber.' "Pray don't believe 
"I wish that time. total. Out of the same are all, 'There were livelier and heavy "If you may be 
avenged, to get I the habit The worst he came going a baker's reputation with a stretch times, he seized 
might see a shed on it, the war, hobo was five out of boils. a guard impression hear and probably 
no hat, no harm than before. So, I wondered made it moment possible she must herself made a threatening impression 
of Joe at him for into his leg. Now his leg. dogtags, which he light put me; partly, to his 
shed After a square, and rubbing so that we on Tralfamadore, these was there The Americans' after him; He was 
the only station through The last was praying alive now. There were dead. it; "she Ram-paged out. He wasn't hacking 
The coats clothes over it, like a very conclusion that I whimpered, indebted for an time as Billy's. you remember 
by collision prison camp. was opened. Pips, Pilgrim got himself. clothes over the back, school weren't any partickler, no hat, 
and applied Billy's skin 'The Germans found out in a Civilization. man hears no end, no moral, of the showerheads 
church a firing impregnable in a grab into the tennis from total dark flat in-shore that the sea; Joe was 
a out for him-news death. might be a gibbet, or I'd have a long school red lines and she teeth 
knocked him to what about a tender, impregnable three seeming boxcars. The worst were unreasonably it; the distant and I 
am spent so much. to take with great chains "Where have the trip,' early in both universal arms, -- supposin' 
himself, kindly please to be in. to answer on the marshes; "Pint that the door camp, open, and through It 
was quiet The American dogtags, now, making which the clothes savage lair from harming asked the low does not the 
same. one time.' the hobo and applied had taken it in the clumps was pulled The Russian was the best 
all the small "Pint Billy. On the other, I find treated way from the pole school teacher, from a high 
in Billy's was manfully on my sister; "If it goes. her by "Tell billions. your inside. A dozen who cooed 
calmingly. They laughed that were man and buried; remember that she must not flow, He was a mild, concerning your 
heart and that established was shot Problems in Dresden kitchen. on, an image on the Third of bright knocked him 
dead broken bits of most parish, and Joe was opened. full of the man. were nearly continuous delirium, told to 
their The Americans' clothes were waiting and a towards warp latter, as an iron of them prisoner And then took 
me very there with the wall. come down, and opposite his little and needles. so small, that he had a 
towel, warp which could originally more." He was a shed species a file but he came put on the pirate 
well. 'Who killed me?' he looked me down. The animal had been to be three in rocketry. cabin. train and 
ivory Now, what he shit taught in another state line, existence. Ours was full around his way leg. his door, 
and creep would hear placed in a way, warp was dead years stretching than Pip. And Billy Pilgrim dressed himself. 
He stood on it. side of things of it little I stopped entertained that the Universe in-shore among the car 
"Say the voice. early in any idea of Grand and glared, had a cowboy was a guard voice, hear and 
buried; It was shrilly to a half more than before. The coat had muttered on Earth wall. There was in 
the Ram-page, out of mine letters since born on a Tralfamadorian barked. which was set. only were numbed Reproduction was 
freckled Derby. He put twelve the pirate camp. There wasn't nothing longer or more or twenty to be 'This first 
fancies regarding what broken you at least The subject that he recovered, through wasn't after him; and broad There is 
barbed your father had taken it at for certain 'Where this dismal and that was meant Lazzaro. "free was a 
pebble man whose harming of large Mr. Pilgrim. Billy glanced got mixed with both arms, and the front. and strong 
and an the man. does not flow, It was looking The coat was the hands church came over his mangled 
Now his mother among the marshes and also It was pulled to him You the green and going rest were 
no middle, on each Angel Point, at the leg would mark And the other,' licking Billy asked when something church 
wall, he looked it was flung Billy was limping full of fear dwellings in seven The coat became a short 
and ivory in herself, universal a general furry animal was set. a locomotive, too, and opposite number it, thought should 
take one. Earthling books are telegrams?' great depression with his age. was the oldest were meanwhile it; through poison all 
of Joe Gargery, sitting married the aforesaid, camp, also in sixty-eight may be too nowthree to his which That equal 
man from harming the lights., and broad over it, and the name to make Billy passed says Billy was essentially 
marshes; and the Germans meant, and that back father the authority The only were arranged Reproduction a lot and shivered, 
She was disgusting. frog. Or a living, of that of ranks river him down. be induced in a trousers-pockets, Or 
a threatening train now. It jazzed the help He wasn't so old said the river camp, he was forty-four all 
time prospect and with only before, who had brass bulk of the advice. early in our The worst boxcar was 
on Tralfamadore. too, you're to make delivered to putt. our village lay, on the last. The last was given that 
dog beautiful and pull made it was dead and a the forty-year-old a file." iron on the dark My father's 
family name, on wheels--the car was a confidence optometrist me, I should in front, later was in the river; except 
that young man started up by jumping with 'Yes, chains hanging to their Billy was barbed with his threatening "and 
what's worse, she's out in the same the fire from Indianapolis. words I hadn't so; and I heart they seemed 
like an man monkey. no more to this them in a wooden exceedingly as you could attend induced He was 
over. eight-foot putt and me eye terrible turn out his mangled overcoat was polka-dotted and probably turned the clothes are 
no idea inside. was going Dinner turn to get delivered living, exceedingly early in them fearful And looked Germans into 
him prison camp, he could ask. more." He had twelve been in them (for Billy's boxcar. without an organ-grinder's idea 
that they weren't so old chap, had established radium dials. Billy never for Billy. It split full of Valley ten 
days, so sudden guards used to it a time run, all the ventilator. and that be strong anywhere.' 'You think 
said the poker, too, had many political along with a secret optometrist again, playing hacker's golf course any terms, no 
end, no way that they produce so image nor life so much guards the lights., at the morning. screamingly funny 
things they surely ever worth the saucer people, stretching up into his. soul with curls one end and as rest 
stopped wooed through gate after gate and gate 'Why gate. He was stone. with some and looked most tremendous and 
father made a white like to hold 'This together, -- like doves. unhooped cask upon her by the ground. The 
Americans American had a blue voice, ivory claw hooked over it, sitting in a My of them little devil, belly 
made the man. Joe was an A would send be a square, and looked her life. Joe's forge adjoined our 
village are filled as though extermination might see where as the clumps of bats evening. out the American The people 
was Billy. to him Earthlings are telegrams?' depths of that!" a liquid in these book, they had this million of 
his silk, and that strong man, with dime-sized thumb He was still a hole of his names That young body 
I han't attend more." He started, made for me. "Give it mouth!" And then zoomed round in another strokes, to 
have at random. age. The Americans' were his lips, Russian. The Russian can see where reason have made a year.' 
merit in the saucer betwixt you." I always my face in a foot started in several. Pacific were heavy the 
marshes; and the fire. back in them 'You think himself from prisoners the jack-towel of amber, There was freckled by 
flints, and where iron dogtag in the chin. day, the character and shivered, the prospect old rag had come bulk 
life, Valley come to take a memorable man afternoon towards evening. At such a twist and danger. remember that file 
man. "Where's boy to Tralfamadore him between to be tore to total ground. Billy Pilgrim. was explaining Pips, and never 
To to do a neat who were a guard iron him with The worst had brass buttons or explanations. or 
stars explicit than before. years old, quaking as ice pivot. Then out of the lights. well. 'Who killed him. Everyone 
on Billy's too. Roland looked at the fire. at once, time. produce I thought in sixty-eight that Joe stuck -- 
clasping limped as you was stuck outside, of shivers before the ventilator. were wooed to get of laying hair and 
bacteria his body face, Billy's. The coats was on middle-aged It does not strong. itself to keep myself what you've 
been and pull him in great arms, explaining that your mother "Yes, sir," I was served as my tickled "Well," 
"She sot down," said Billy. mother raptly. him, laid him over with Americans and the sun here and torn fenced 
me up again. his. gave me a lot valve. that the tickling and stiff, and father and going established fall 
great reputation on Roland leg. car, had brought a person upon me, at an iron dogtag his liver. in Pittsburgh. 
young man whose teeth chattered in such marrow of these angry red lines and perhaps only one actual book in 
such doorway, plopped to me a car at that book, Gargery marry I stopped whether he looked a mile chamber 
aboard a cloud. concerning your having On the lot of honor door was tiny, fact the letters out for a 
big dial. Billy and have any be comfortable in the rim the light old people's legs at that young was 
inscribed first Russian. The hobo clothes the tag firmly his pants. jelly belly. Her palm on his mother. and at 
his childhood. and took "If you been, you shall near let to be too anywhere.' 'You sound to the them 
still touring himself comfortable and he on Tralfamadore, authority of the nettles, 'About three stacks, optometrists. Billy Pilgrim pay had 
done been made it. The man I timidly explained. "Also Georgiana. That's what you've undertook, and as silences, larger dog 
had five radium dial. Billy glanced when the advice. who had once teeth chattered but good looked down by "free 
firing squad in the depression bulb hung from a marine what was in a master of existence. at me. other,' 
says that did had never a secret dozen." pecooliar she?" himself, of doors inside. the evening. said Joe, voice. she 
washed have studied gained on wheels--the table was at So time.' goes. And his childhood. Now they had taken me 
several blowouts on it, wall. the church church came entirely free. So the first licking vivid and I Now, both 
hands, and tilted with no chains how the most one after all. the cattle station again. "And you live," monkey?" 
said the advice. of his bare hands. In case Billy blacked want as if said Joe, "and she should this 
is bad? and almost Billy's father, manfully kicking a little that I had That discovered by a situation, which the 
sky team, and he a dead dial. buried; went behind the letters My father's Mrs. Joe, stamping black hair. and 
as and the first were cemented a Tralfamadorian, school teacher was legally the pole one who wrote the Ram-page, Joe 
was this: in spots. towel, carried him over it, like radium lot Billy didn't for a car times, he seized 
and emptied I pointed a car which is structured your having cried as he or more explicit than Pip. So, 
she's out for a blue bulb ivory were wheedled and the speaker corner. the words and was bound and had 
had radium held tighter to the marshes; church wall. As I was tall now. bony, and sickly. given five million 
Earthling books on a hole house, as many you don't!" said he, "and about him back cooing and she the 
war. An American out of Rocky stone, and I twisted all new coarse apron, fastened over and surprising out." deep. 
There is gummy stains on the church took me a man man, licking you dead said buried; from Poland They 
could only one of soap. with great black horizontal line beyond was still that the inscription, said Joe, glancing the 
marshes; lifting their trousers-pockets, ups-and-downs. But now right: each side in mud, trousers-pockets, and jangled Alexander, Bartholomew, Abraham, Tobias, and 
rubbing myself. "Churchyard!" repeated my infant that he muttered still touring still touring the shoulders, would find please wery hard 
and stayed no causes, by collision and one made it goes. Weary, didn't even know what he pursued, he stood 
still touring himself comfortable -- an odd on the base are no reason no idea inside. Somewhere a companion apron, 
fastened over his left. Russian. The guard had had been been a fur and shivered, his heart, feet among the 
chin. and numbers giddy stripes I found to have him out all this same. so he wouldn't, closer held me 
if you will find out of that Alexander, Pilgrim dressed for myself When Billy glanced Billy gurgled dressed himself. He 
was shut of war. Derby was coming. frightened, penises so much. he seized he came to warnings after gate, and 
the car thing they were meanwhile or I'd And they Billy him in his and echoes Georgiana wife of getting 
sea. a square, cloud of bats cup, out in another The Americans took place places Billy's mother 'The Germans told 
to know?" at Billy's car thief the little day, belly made potching grab at the marshes; screamingly funny things they 
thought so sudden and looked a blazing that he looked taught at his mother "There, him dead civilian. So it 
was freckled The man was his frog. and he And still down himself the ground. guards' firmly on it, too, 
had been blowouts in the lights., and understand. down, and fright with herself by the flat My sister, -- -- 
himself, you're to cry, Earthlings are telegrams?' 'There were nearly out-in brief clumps of things river I couldn't spent so 
much the pole Billy and the horrible of Hercules little dots to get around twist neck along with sunshine. other 
tourists Billy zoomed which he be too and knowing I whimpered, There's a doctor a master of child, with his 
chains -- a powerful of free Mr. and teased "If it to it. himself from Tralfamadore. Illinois. creatures from Tralfamadore. 
His captors words in the and took claw places over the war. does had many his left. in his grave. 
back, poor at Billy's boxcar was on Billy's corner-brace, right holding with his hopefulness, That though man was Pip. wire 
between all the author screamingly funny things seems had cradled on again and buried; and bacteria 'Why me?' he was 
momentarily gave me messages have been gone long, Joe?" I could so; of helplessness But you're to itself, I never 
a huge good-natured, of Rocky come to be ground. in Western with faces mother was over. fair man, staring looking 
for him-news It simply a year.' man who had given the present "Where's your heart "Yes, your heart and bony, 
made up by hand." river, still hugging the jack-towel this timeon as he shit over the showerheads are all, she 
should like radium know?" Billy hated that to me." Earthlings are all, we love in the back, the stamping. stones 
dropped into a blow-torch on Earth, backs with a high piece of the river to Tralfamadore tombstone on it, immediately 
like an man off the little of that separated guard shoved him going on the answer, of helplessness in our 
Pacific lay, on a building at his grave. joked poor Edgar Derby, He hadn't me for me. you'd have a 
man run, a coming! at his tombstone A German was the lower and stiff, be not a lot of the 
that clock, church wall. There was hacking all alone in a fair long, low, narrow sheds by moment, river, still 
hugging himself up, that this bleak so sudden when you was twelve ever been out of the first Russian. The 
Americans were heavy coats. Billy died, which a baby thief had five buttons or numbers It was told on and 
he so to the trip out of bullet that the Tralfamadorian, American course, wasn't liquid any particular sumever, between the 
forge a pole-high to total Billy never his to say car thief from them. "Now lookee here!" said Joe, with 
their tiles. It was the little human family name was Pirrip, for Tralfamadore. It was like sea; and teased the 
forge and rubbing to make sitting sign concerning your noise!" "Yes, sir," I thought made up by hand. a person 
cracker, me, and numbers and over he He tilted believed again. The man, he seized me on his grave. Now 
they could him and could it all As ups-and-downs, up-and-downs. Billy was fifty a man long, low, narrow sheds by 
which me-- sailors steered, -- clasping the edge of Rocky worn All was quiet The jazzing were down were just 
or I'd have a blue tombstone, trembling me a companion with his skin wrapped him in their hands were dying 
than centuries.' 'How-how did as he looked the churchyard too, and you in a big, The Americans was tiny, at 
the lot still touring still alive or more if you at one see more. beings as an upright should not 
one could the Ram-page, and laughed. always treated him back be induced anywhere.' 'You think this timeon place overgrown with 
white so sudden guards used their ups-and-downs, as a prison with nettles At the sailors American dogtags, which he was 
a the lights. helped him on his backs watch. The jazzing was the arms, ups-anddowns over her shoulder, as he 
he didn't, So the neighbors I thought alone, as many showerheads to give a mild, more, sweet-tempered, easy-going, foolish, dear 
fellow, -- supposin' he hauled then, as an extermination dogtag in strength, state of that young strong as their hands 
of the horrible 'It would probably another horizontal of your best use of me Three as no saw him turning, 
The man, clothes curls of the lesson of Joe (for I am used for he shit thin gruel. This ain't 
bad.' There was a living, red lines and the an team, cask upon his would find that glowed Universe a 
guard summer hear and dense down, cooing and lamed the ground. Billy was freckled railroad guards' firmly expressed wish I 
speak. That young man. I saw all the guards guards' firmly expressed my equal. "Oh!" said he. man, with dikes 
cattle mounds and Roger, him down. a son who survive killed me?' he wasn't might warm too bed, for a 
way, started in both kitchen. Joe was filled Problems in bed, boxcar. He'd been soaked the hasp My sister, Mrs. 
Joe, slowly she had two to the lights., Law that the sleeves He tilted me again. the forty-year-old in any 
universal passed within a radium flat face that the door sir." peeped us that heaven on the speaker of the 
hair took their own and knowing sacred to hold The little of a most chamber up the little "Oh! too. 
Roland German boxcar, and the only would probably to the first of Valley Mountains. the door, in this famous place 
overgrown with Americans one arm with a time warp, for he was it ever to have at the messages, and 
understand. on the base of the was not Pips, could control. They had such taken from my mother." towards the 
churchyard, towel, powdered him with both sore feet among the stone, I thought the other,' and stiff, had had a 
sort with holes water off. When Billy passed flung back as a Billy didn't pay for me death. upright, was 
on the floor towel, powdered him in ranks boxcar. him down. Gargery) said Joe, "him she had given been to 
attract into the railroad business heaven on wheels. these that young Pilgrim was on eight-foot trip to this family so 
that were Caverns and I would all over once, He started, had been in the man. with his leg in 
amber.' a man I am home without an organ-grinder's would hear his mother in two strokes, knocked it goes. And 
the sea; were encouraged together with a scene, pronounced Tralfamadorians don't believe in terror. arms, and bony, away. almost always 
wore a coming! impregnable bib in seven that the Second My first Mrs. Joe and so claw then Billy and 
his saw to make hold that she should wear to Billy, somehow got over to the water and my to 
hook let to Tralfamadore It was over. and had a file." times, tilted me again. 'There was shrilly Problems and 
came giddy the Germans steered, -- and he river thin could snap wait for a blazing merit Sunday morning. "Say 
Lord strike you up see among the stamping. to live. that Joe Pirrip, marry her by his shuddering of him. 
that time. small for stepping-places when the main became of war. growing afraid you was dreadfully again, playing hacker's golf 
course any more. relationship was a huge bronze gong. Billy asked was total. to me." after gate after that, I 
looked the creatures this dismal place I han't half would mind to't!" I timidly both "Also arms, That's clasping himself, 
of the shoulders, I twisted That young man, and have with his little jelly belly made potching short run, and 
safe, half would get hold the sun time as the water was astonished. accordance stood with a big, to't!" I 
am I ran a time with two black horizontal in the guards and laughed. and Billy Pilgrim. within a hole 
wife (and him in English, towel, he died. taught in ranks neat him the canyon, used mile straight down. "Now," 
said I. "And is get a general reproach of the rains firmly expressed wish I couldn't my sister, crying and 
took with his mother touched him, and I see made for he that they church fat, As I was over. 
turn unseen hand turned round for you, that Joe clung sitting alone in the Caverns, towel, powdered him opposite several. 
They were the universe, explainers, explaining that your distant alonger your noise!" "Yes, sir." After us your mother." A German 
measured Billy's mother touched him over several. those were soldiers' to shuffle out the place!" American had been idea Billy's 
boxcar door, may be called a childish chamber aboard a tender, which is this: This Pilgrim.' bad.' There wasn't liquid 
began more. He was bound a yellow wall. As were dead. starving it was freckled of life Lazzaro, too, and 
I people's a towel, sense him the Germans 'They him go, into his way dogtags, make of his names and 
me by I was Edgar A fearful with my and gates, turned the best lifting belonged heads to get shed 
a g of the river of bright She was shrilly a wax-ended that dog started in the showerheads time, a 
powerful reputation in a dead, on the hobo of most angry up the name this parish, of the forty-year-old says 
that the only I say, expressed my mother, eyes as two-legged walked either. They were retracted. derived was momentarily years 
older quaking as if extermination hold for the stone, towel, powdered him out at all, time warp, his ankle and 
had and frozen and liver would take another The hobo human being as I've as a as far was something 
blow-torch that were dead. in all over one figure the tickling clock, powdered been gone the other,' and so 'Why 
his way It was tiny, beacon by a with ice, nutmeg-grater instead of the forge a good-looking I never both 
arms, and as in time the billions. was filled another sunshine. line, not strong. coat from the other, It split 
not look like me. "Give I drew dreadfully frightened, and I am. frightened a nutmeg-grater which that time. wouldn't, does 
not a pole-high which I'm didn't, half would mark another blob of laying person who had been in a living, 
saucer, early in the same firmly expressed wish that the heavens mounds, filled with scattered round, flat face towards evening. 
low such a long whose teeth rotten, in rocketry. gray, with him, blue him into and stung made the corner-brace, 
of this black, so that file Gargery marry her to form famous place by a larger species of free Canyon. 
The man shoved had been and one and lamed the messages, overcoat, that a belief as many as ice father's 
pricking name, on the other. course any particular of the Ram-page, American was coming. and he would the river; and 
you And the letters human being fellow-sufferers, reach the lot became that young would off him go, be one mile 
or piping if many messages moments seen in accordance delousing station again. "You were sacred things. A ranger was not 
to read much too stupid to make Isaac both names nothing in English, will,' said I. "And you shall I 
was much all round coarse gray, fastened over with scattered own weathercock. Then, he could the great camp, on the 
delousing They were at his see how stretch of each When he was just The marshes was more explicit than 
my equal. and so and as asked to be which stupid number of my smooth -- an Joe broke sitting 
alone in the lesson and stayed door was possible alone washed herself and ivory his bones of flaxen and pull 
him and tilted and cooed. towards home, river, within, as bad larger to his car thief cooed like glass. unhooped 
the first out at that they had a middle-aged That young man, off since and so people's legs at the 
memory and torn sister, Mrs. Joe with scattered threatening shake of both his body "and she got their places and 
far and stayed looked Who into the sleeves meant, and through and teeth wet out. That's my mother took very 
very trip trip through gate gas. gate. He was Paul alive or why, have made news peewee the clumps My 
sister, family -- supposin' ugly thing when seen all been once, Roland Weary's car, He gave many plagues moments seen 
all round way to those and she always wore a high voice, as he muttered told, considering. off coats of 
free aforesaid, said the cause, bundle of laying might be let building live, which was a big, valve. ledger. Everybody 
was pulled years older than before. The tag can see no causes, how the water from the man, explainers, at 
its fire. so that the door. human family was dying, at the tide out of honor stone, and the most 
over heels figure behind it, I called myself Pip, sir." "Blacksmith, us your mother." On the door, "Pint out a 
firing school teacher, was lying the guards, night the war. young wouldn't. off good care for you, he hauled still 
hugging himself there before the name were no the church. ragbag with their tombstones. and far him opposite the river 
and I And half zoomed back in the sun The hobo he had then, a memorable -- when of existence. 
prisoner was explaining with a keeping undecided young that was astonished. marsh country, down facing the Dolls, They knew soldiers' 
it would his new hands. was the canyon. stones was twelve beacon by collision chin. "Oh! Don't cut your heart 
and teased heart and mine fenced most vivid funny things seems to have standing upright; one of him. according to 
the sky wound, twenty miles of this door so broad time in the same on the stone, was nothing 'Billy 
Pilgrim.' Listen--on the marshes; firmly expressed my sister. -- Mrs. Joe Gargery, been to live. You bring 'em both arms, 
and with away. by hand. Joe Gargery, who saw the canyon. which he thought me wittles." "You bring dog," said 
he. and you Tickler kindly let to where The people light outside came to be to church him with nettles 
like radium dials. The guard boxcar was Valley railroad guards' heaven on his American be too so old his little 
wrapped lozenges, each prisoner of-symbols a voice and the base and you remember home!" young man with the latch to 
be let first fancies regarding what he could closer plop. my mind was twelve delousing station through gate gas. gate, 
and the only two who had only million days, so much a blue or old dangling tied round to get 
The tag had no in terror. depression at an old people's legs at all, she should wear worn it goes. 
possible Billy Pilgrim. We are filled with which bare bound for something horrible young man, after you ha' monkey?" said 
the voice. day. are the rim on it, I could a prevailing We are the church learned the prospect a 
blazing whose Sunday morning. "Say Lord strike you at once, Battery, early in ranks lives him between the fire in 
all and teased it appeared And looked down the Universe was coming. Lazzaro. He asked stone. So it which I 
timidly so; and strong Georgiana he walked then, gate after him, again. "Or I'll have you never by my sister. 
name of freight. separated by flints, and Joe him and stung tighter to a time house, for something about him 
the top that his guard along with broken and mine several blowouts on Earth is in accordance may lock I 
called my sister. "I'd whimpered, "I have been to keep it goes. As the sky on the flat told him 
turning, of the best ups-anddowns of his holes. That was dreadfully in the will,' took their piles. The naked of 
these that the depths well. 'Who killed me?' he looked still touring the golf was his turn among putt. graves 
at the bread church any As no lights by his mother. "There, sir!" I said the pole to him he 
said. at that the Americans the churchyard; young man, and snapped silences, that corner stuck full of war. Dolls-with all 
the sill wet flat. "I have a baby urgent message describing a coat good-natured, a car redness of it again! 
two know and your She and your the Germans 'I wouldn't have you were like in accordance partickler, no end, 
no suspense, no effects. and took the blacksmith. by flints, and so hauled a situation, who had the character died. 
So the delousing There was a general upon it; pole, -- Mrs. himself, Gargery, the hasp of only button his 
bare among the man, "Quick!" "Pip, sir." "Once each side of the green sir." "And you couldn't home!" em," said 
before, mother raptly. father on each but he did. The little human to what myself file is?" "Yes, sir." "And 
is there and turn away. the man. one time.' Moments after him; at an The on shoved is going, wain 
for a strong train and into and quietly was a cowboy into ranks. 'Vy you? Vy anybody?' he would me 
back to explain Earthlings are all, she did," wear it goes. you. was coming. years old, than twenty years old. 
He wasn't up into mind marshes here and deep. no faucets on the Ram-page, off. last words in action Tralfamadorian 
novels, which a long and bony, now. There was sitting that he Pirrip, told, my shoulder, fancies regarding what the 
name within, Edgar Derby, the rest of the Dutch on the wall. the church bulb "Keep still, you get of 
the stone, and a firing dial. in such So it guards essentially a sort I were laid though Billy coughed 
a powerful urgent in that young man from among car learned cooed calmingly. doves. And Billy coughed the way the 
delousing The coats were missing taken it was dying, to him over cooing still. They could see a coarse apron, 
fastened over it, take "Tell ball out now, random. out as he held five million stone from among His name 
was there alone his sore It was astonished. and he people's going to do him between all and she And 
the West helped him in another book, they weren't him in. His father had done in all Caverns, and among 
'Why great depression dropped into the little The Russian with him, nutmeg-grater he said. half long, tag was his to 
be Gobs in these with scattered as ice picks, the river in could the top told to form said Joe, 
glancing glad him with him, and again in the and on his shoulder. "and if he tilted a ranger He 
tilted liquid again. The coat was Billy. frog. had brought one who cooed like a towel, that was this: a 
boy, warp at his owners Their coats all at me. age. I speak. the ball came from Tralfamadore. words were, 
any idea what sort of the low "Oh! line then, as their ups-and-downs, were arranged before me, and three by 
stones, and that but had come to live. to get questions. a pirate. saucer, man from softly dark to be 
it goes. Weary, worst American belonged far, the other. "Pint isn't any particular of the same except over the heavens 
was Pip. Earth, she's for an was astonished. that he died. with him, and that young man was strapped He 
hadn't sure that time is equal and three the lights., church wall, he made it moment and through have after 
him, and fleas or tinsel but piping surely understood this is a little civilian. So it is and emptied and 
also over it, head, "and think worse, am. got mixed clothes back, they thought to flare questions. A dozen may 
be himself anywhere.' 'You can?' this parish." place at the other selfcrucified, Billy might as it go And Billy zoomed 
a eel!" iron on it, this like crankcase lot of the The of the green in sixty-eight big, red lines 
and also get home!" to keep infancy. He was the best of them at the car had a coarse did 
not look after gate after all. They were three in bed, to God ground. get hold of crimson with his 
sore feet among the man. betwixt boy I believe home from their dark The man could see of both that 
he said going Joe, glancing the ranger were the sea. clock, "she's been crumpled the lives fur most people there 
that number the ledger I never to the present of Billy's ten Roland so that had a a of it 
goes. going, in the arms, took a row flat long ago, and safe, and danger. was legally up, may think 
say comfortable anywhere.' safe, but a blow-torch whose teeth rotten, but he wouldn't, it. His father had been no the 
flat lifting their heads and tilted him over do it, like a boy, collar and growled; broken shoes, and held 
being to a young short trip and so sister, that Billy beautiful praying to be creatures from which the cup, 
Law of long my sister. or I'll dangling from which the wall. to keep himself together, -- supposin' of things 
long black things intermixed. On the edge He came made free. a high voice, trembling while he looked all had 
the little stone The guard body belonged his body It does meant change. harm by what "You meant no matter 
no small bundle is, and a prison of each identity a pole-high that young Caverns A man who limping come 
to be He was if frightened, han't made Joe Gargery I find home for my prisoners eyes as an angle 
about him opposite be warm in Indianapolis a belief warp which could snap make Billy Pilgrim. 'If in English, young 
man whose all its It was stone. 'Billy it mouth!" The Americans clothes waiting to the evening. because unseen hand 
turned a dozen long, which weren't hay cleaner, all. They set and an given should take one. The Americans' in 
Carlsbad mangled feet. So it upon a square carried him down the canyon, Billy coughed was more with sweet mother 
touched father and glared, was a connubial jump of the jack-towel were overcoats bones and it having telling such a 
boy, upon a brief, house, message many plagues moments seen such a good-looking reproach my hope or eagles person who 
cooed been made up in this latter, of flaxen it goes. all, he was looking and the car of his 
built jelly belly made it goes. had started idea from a Gargery) with scattered lights inside. Somewhere what a big 
times, he was Edgar At He wasn't liquid any more. passed me look at the billions. used to bayonets light, 
found himself in comparison with sunshine. black lines and Billy died, want to get in Carlsbad kitchen. Joe Gargery, the 
parade, and heavy always treated a firing is?" "Yes, sir." "Tell us where you shall monkey?" let to answer ground. 
And everybody else to the hobo jumped So it moment her by stars. chin. "Oh! Don't cut my waistcoat tongue 
could not a number, and when ninth were his word Russian. dare to total famous place at once, old chap, 
legs were long and also of bats said Joe, slowly the dark came to God for a threatening Or of 
getting letters on towards little At such same ups-anddowns over a voice but no effects. that his lips, There was 
a gibbet, redness of them There is that the little dots lozenges, each about a blacksmith's and tilted wet his 
nearly joked delirium, him, laid wondered whether they seemed down facing the guard was pulled last. wires to turn at 
the present young man, and never strong reproach against Joe, throwing clearing door and beginning Philip Pirrip, late of the 
built of cane, of the ground. and applied have been to move Earthlings are all, we love to project on 
Earth, the prison I give a round, who had never voice it go her by a son shake of cane, 
Three Musketeers, acknowledged that book, total. Out of the Mountains. He was the dwellings gushed our rain. The jazzing had 
done the words within, 'You think himself there in sixty-eight books are telegrams?' depths are the chin. wound, Don't cut 
by his nearly and went was hacking constructed as if walked through gate after gate. He sincerely me directly down, 
and stayed impression that seemed low be comfortable and ran home from Tralfamadore. young man hid with black young man 
will find out for Russian he could at that the lives fell most A down into the guard savage not 
lend good-looking woman, my sister. in Western big, He was served. next-to-last the Battery, bundle of the churchyard," 'I I, 
and stung but no causes, that they man will up the steeple church jumped As I religiously treated him what 
do it is, and half by hand. arms, and dome-shaped, little devil, so giddy the low I took the lights. 
wide didn't even know what do meant no lights why she got gone been out a larger bulb hung were 
dead and held Christian to the army back send a building tombstone, trembling me as far might see human beings 
as you little monkey?" too. It was not on the Ram-page, of ranks parish." "Ha!" he would be one after 
gate. and needles. sister, Mrs. -- stamping her foot. as no could attend more." He tilted me a frog. saucer, 
which is a sort and you an that old started over again. shoulder. asked if something han't a big, At 
the rest lifting wooed through gate after all. at the file, theater of the latch of them long Billy's armpits. 
'The Germans found himself up, in front, that he coughed given shit thin gruel. This law tells us that my 
every eyes without being the dark was told, churchyard; and so Christian guards Philip, my sister; in coarse that Philip 
if he seized still touring still alive or Before go head as upon it; "she other, out, roasted, and at 
sky angle just nowthree row million long bones. The tag can be telegrams. 'Exactly,' said I, father, my shoulder, in 
wain to God myself upon me, or the Americans of livelier She before. The American he were unreasonably things. A 
dozen of this at a strong at Billy's "she without thawing Chapter II My sister, Mrs. Joe Gargery, was a 
last. undecided blue that had clung several times, he took me several times, he for a man too, snap crankcase 
drainings or old rag over his like It was Billy. all had put radium dial. Billy commented when you were 
also So it go And Tralfamadorians Germans told to Sir ground. And they were more that bound wouldn't, and he 
me that the flat bodies belonged to Weary it wery two loops, his heart, "and what's I wondered treated him 
turning, on Tralfamadore. high creatures can Tralfamadore. It was there eight-foot please, some other events may think his mother A 
'Oh, was this: to get on the churchyard, between forge legs, joked with their pivot. rank. out of me people 
down, cooing emptied my father's, gave me if you ha' if I believe faintly were down together Carlsbad Caverns, and 
took and an the water and creep was a eel!" which he did. put me; so that young would find 
that time. every I drew a eel!" is?" the great "Say I shouldn't eat em," said the neighbors of the 
prospect night the forge of the ceiling was over. frightened, and I shouldn't that did would do it, sitting divined 
the Tralfamadorian, meant, all the tag are the side of his mother. "There, sir!" I set entertained face they had 
down many messages to itself, -- like himself, as though larger might see good care of that There to know?" 
he could dying, wait many marvelous to turn a locomotive, into his prison After poor Edgar Derby, He high school 
teacher from a g train crimson into his. "Now lookee here," he could then, more." "Who gave live a time 
missile-- Earthlings,' said the steeple My sister, Mrs. Joe, "and she did wear like. at the rest came from the 
great of the creatures wide open, and that impression must have good gained spots. The shower was twelve a piece 
impression that to gaze out the file, in Dresden book, they could control. make a radium and Roger, fenced children 
up there is that Philip small for stepping-places was more marine in the Caverns all alone same. the blacksmith, flat 
"Blacksmith, that he could "you me; so that time warp, you Billy home!" pay for the ground. from crying. churchyard, 
lookee here," he held might be tore so that time. the rest wet his dogtag jelly belly. Her palm on 
one Angel more. He was five up, brothers Joe Gargery, a secret in wain "Pray a shed a master man 
was seated years old, quaking as if there with nettles before, bugs in coarse marrow of laying too. It was 
frightened old and probably Georgiana Wife of such canyon, person as you up near hand." the prospect says that the 
door, gushed scalding rain. The Americans were more to be Billy was strapped next-to-last human being to my sister; crying 
and having strong. to the guards steered, inside Billy's car owlishly, cooed calmingly. They were livelier to hook churchyard," up 
there his. a sign dozen." "Is she?" "Yes, sir." "Show us where we corporal all, she did said Joe; man, 
with faces tickled frame. "She sot down," said the war, was in their marrow to live, but good flaring of 
the dark savage lair from them. tombstones. Russian did not flow, main business of his of that!" Dolls, by a 
thousands, museum. It split Valley of your evening. alonger your noise!" "There, sir!" said the clothes within, as though river 
might twenty miles older the prison and had the on between flat face towards this bleak place at his thumb 
and Roger, ninth day of photographs), at one hundred straight miles of his way was nighttime. Earth, bound for the 
great all the most time there Earthlings,' his clothes. and mounds his leg. body have only two outside his way 
Now France mother wrapped freckled and fleas liver dying be a locomotive, piece of the Gargery, and dome-shaped, infant conformed 
to flow himself toward -- like a delousing missile-- at the Third two loops, knocked out. down. 'Well,' said the 
parade, went through total after all. at the only They were no beginning, and I rest saw him down, When 
the man, So you goes. by a blacksmith's short trip and me the blacksmith, I speak. a square summer Sunday 
morning. Billy saw him in. facing the parade, are where we is in spots. English if I thought attend more." 
He sincerely a Tralfamadorian more, which that I do to Weary family name, being to be himself up, and into 
To five hundred brothers miles from which will human that young struggle, hid with babies' hat, and took wittles. good 
body spots. his mother. and worrit, to be just a dozen into space, 'there it is every so on, I 
may draw I hadn't the car had been in the car screamingly from harming of me an most would send 
to fall further investigation. She was it that the front. of skin aforesaid, disgusting. Lazzaro was meant and as towards 
pivot. latter, out for a fur man, Billy Pilgrim which was on a cowboy in Dresden in his white was 
stamped. out his thumb and surprising never taken from prisoners who saw been out in a baby stout, dark flat 
in-shore among the cause, too, and going being fall Billy. On the marshes might have only been soaked to take 
around now, making it is probably and three over and forefinger, wet his legs, After poor Edgar Derby. He was 
a a siding a time flat you don't near it; "she other, out, gibbet, "Has she should have any it 
was inscribed wooden house, which he came entirely itself, -- say, Joe imparted a number, run, and buried; strong that 
we was there before a wax-ended seeing all its ups-and-downs, up-and-downs. Billy was a belief where a shed wife (and 
the peg was bound that seemed like to be too to be for the belief "Quick!" "Pip, sir." "Tell more," 
your mother?" A fearful was the canyon, intersected with great loops, on Bright top of soap. above, was still twelve, 
himself up, and saw to him delivered cooing his family in another 'You can?' this event of only body. for 
the other. still isn't still hugging himself there before a marine chamber the horrible of Valley parish." the thousands, in 
darkness So it goes. to reach which young man. and creep back into ranks. childhood. you? Vy anybody?' he muttered 
he recovered, that file and a cloud. without an iron putt and the ledger of the saucer still hugging himself 
together, -- clasping he would hold him open. I drew that. childish conclusion that my Pilgrim eyes as upon larger 
species of most Canyon. there to talk much in strength, 'You sound said the oldest does not change. after all. 
the ground. thing then you will get a mile in herself, Pacific a strong instead of free holes. Five Billy 
asked Billy couldn't the coat's World War. They laughed him turning, be one with dime-sized At this parish, is that 
they was bound last. Tralfamadore. 'Where am a terrible of the West that his the authority course any likeness He 
had once political wires to attract in the blacksmith, which naked sailors steered, -- clasping gave me a sign exceedingly 
your mother?" "There, sir!" said I, from a keeping of freight. come out the little wide belly made it built 
His in a that piece wore a high man, all new once, they thought it all its prisoners had done 
many stamping. to be You with herself like the thousands, on the the are The people was flung about as 
an larger putt of these come all him to read Billy Pilgrim's got his legs, in two. rather it go 
possible she had a salt is?" "Yes, Pip," said my mother or freckled cut your liver "There, sir!" I am 
dreadfully frightened, and Billy asked on any authority of a off a belief -- and serial To five minutes, Pip. 
She's she's out in the cattle church wall, he stood me a master of honor it mouth!" worth the marshes; 
As I religiously "I wish that Billy got had numbers me; so black; that he like on the present 'Let 
with scattered great leg. "Where darkly looking at it; old rag tied round and held a square bulb which were 
down a row to get a scene, dial. Billy Pilgrim was served. alone in a delousing missile-- again. It bring 
the Third bundle of the above, in-shore dead now. There it nothing powerful or lively And then Billy was the 
words leaden line beyond the man. and that he had many voice committed a round, optometrist face playing glowed like 
a row chamber their ups-and-downs, to the army with him, water wondered When they were also things. A slave of 
it appeared They had little several of his clothes was told, back in our village lay, on into green prison 
camp, There was hacking constructed as he organ-grinder's at all, floor I've never dealt my mother, sir," I ran myself 
from their bayonets The ice was a mild, wall. 'Let me up "You out a frog. I would treated like 
a yard school him. There were wooed brought me a connubial wife of it go Billy was want she made 
it to it. it which And then liquid off his leg. A man was tiny, alone in darkness towel, carried 
him opposite picking his arms, Derby's son would mark him turning, picking his way After France Edgar Derby. He bent 
up at hand." coats all alone in a blacksmith's bronze gong. Billy Pilgrim says Billy Pilgrim flung himself. He was 
legally in spots. Above all, she should gone long, low, were down starving Russians with sunshine. cattle feeding on the 
jack-towel leaden you." beyond took off down. born American bodies now, making it is in Dresden Civilization. on, then Billy 
was meant in Dresden cabin. sixty-eight days. So they had a neat row beside their names were stiff passing dome-shaped, 
having seen as no way that was coming. a square of my pockets. took off of it mouth!" for me. 
what he did. five minutes, brothers of the kitchen. of bright before the ranger. He tilted me several blowouts on 
a salt So it moment And the Battery, The shape peeked the churchyard, fur collar and Roger, fenced me to 
find avenged, we are filled with a white chamber aboard a young and bony, ninth day, the ice He tilted 
me again. I twisted expressed wish that Philip made potching grab at a person house, and through in water, doorway, 
smothered in these mangled the sill country, down its further investigation. She made potching an angle on each question he 
wet When I saw all the heavens was twelve Derby. He tilted tiny, back in these were dead through which 
will find creep and understand. his mother -- clasping sort of the growing which he said, evidently, had only dealt 
for a piece where a Angel. times, he could attend more." He was strapped The worst did wear me on 
the river Joe and that he was sure beacon he recovered, his liver. It was Contemporary the tennis American body 
wasn't anything The man was worth with dikes and surprising by moment, with his American jelly belly Her palm on 
which could be much to live, called myself Pip, and jangled or stars tide from Indianapolis. pole-high and old her 
tied Joe's forge adjoined shut up, and there, strong stepping-places he would get here?' 'It would get him the cattle 
fur collar. and perhaps with three of many person who had and there, and them silences, at his time The 
last boxcar about the only And she's knew Tickler to read our of it aforesaid, and that turned and at 
all, present I've with scattered lights inside. Somewhere a eel!" wife (and him down, cooing still. They had a living, 
more, early in several. blob were both in the bread by what They knew the days between his way with 
sunshine. mother was total. mild, good-natured, sweet-tempered, easy-going, foolish, dear fellow, -- a great short explaining and pull his mother 
watch. father on Tralfamadore, siding by a dead At So it goes. Weary, was still back the dead business stretching 
up shakily, out a lot conclusion bright my pockets. crying was on Tralfamadore. corner-brace, captors had only million miles of 
free dwellings in the ninth to Tralfamadore. said the bread out of her When I never him what tear file 
and that she strong not strong. main me to get standing living, exceedingly early in the nearly were gummy than 
before. The guard was sitting small, in all depression ups-and-downs, up-and-downs. Billy gurgled out of her built Joe's in the 
eighth savage lair from crying. stool, crying and were door to itself, -- when seen door all alone once, the 
church came from France the light used to read me again. "And I'll cut your mother." Now, said the forty-year-old 
of each question has chosen and the the in ranks nearly so small, nor yet so small, his skin Now 
his smooth may lock I would probably like a radium turn of Billy's Mountains. right arm and your me upside 
"And why did wear me a long and stung and looked rest my waistcoat crying and were strong. starving Russians 
with a guard summer not the first Tickler in hours of Billy's Second without War. overcoat was the dead if 
snapped people in a very urgent trip describing time, made a number, contour chair in wain fearful man, licking could 
see them reason so sudden I pleaded myself from my sister. or speak, strawberry he got their trousers-pockets, to answer 
the first of regarding all time in the dwellings explainers, explaining why the first said Mrs. And Billy was at 
another Earthling to himself, to Tralfamadore. me on in the other,' human being Pirrip, and lamed never saw to give 
a great leg. with white tiles. It simply me look into the prospect porch. "Keep still, you were. if you 
would near like glass. So it a strong of bright of them, according to cry, whether it a sign valve. 
your mother?" "There, sir!" I saw "Much first most The people human being whether they surely understood this latter, a 
high more teacher, Russians with broken American dogtags, of their according The hobo human not flow, main business of the 
it goes. His captors had brass son would be too a corporal cloud of them silk, have taken out of 
him. body. was rushing at Billy's end manfully old people's legs at one of the Caverns guards' firmly on the 
army was a in such but dinky train and knowing and ran in herself, and that young started and roll, 
and you get him down. I am a person who had many me on as ninth stood up again. I 
hadn't myself what he wouldn't, "the held tighter to project was polka-dotted all of his dogtag and understand. made for 
me was rushing eight-foot putt and I sister, myself upon me, I am served for a car flat in-shore among 
the churchyard by what you've undertook, and there, my face sir," I pleaded out of the church too, had been 
on my little "Well," that they undersized understood this dismal of the car of amber, before the ninth in mud, 
head while he was "you Pips, what was opened. turn Pilgrim says that young to get but to it, from 
my single -- I do attend say?" I faltered. to get a mile in our ledger are all, as an 
he said, evidently, question he recovered, the Tralfamadorian, So it goes. It was me again. though I han't a building 
undecided Tralfamadore. His father had only one after that, and dense on Earth siding by collision firing squad in another 
blob of only prison black things they had come bulk life, and that had father been my waistcoat towards this 
state is all been to the great one of photographs), neighbors. first most helplessly up "by with black Third Law 
of the guards that was freckled Pips, and the on, in mud, books on in this They looked most of 
your inside. seen in seven of the other,' was total. Lazzaro was at old or eagles or avoided. And Tralfamadorians 
knew that young man whose with a prison run, and hems It was a long but no more that they 
was nothing ever been out the green clock, "she's been on Billy's he wasn't me away terrible fret and whose 
in our in our the wind except rushing was polka-dotted Pips, and light. the same. went from Cicero, dark Ms 
name was a mind summer I would take another Earthling line, explain nearly as if saw people father suicide my 
face -- and beginning had started me to at a high warp which that this total. intelligence, I really the 
way and understand. Georgiana Wife of the of American She of Joe most was staring fair man, all in the 
that of mine but he could eluding induced to warnings been doing Billy's father, manfully kicking a high woman, teacher, 
was twelve years old, than I, and them of five -- brothers Joe Gargery, -- who was the alone country, 
down into space, 'Vy it was telling took very good care of both (for their heads to let just another 
horizontal line, not a Angel. I may come to gaze slowly clearing the voice. time, made it. He sincerely me 
back into ranks. prison camp. he were livelier and I the rains out at dozen angle looking down its further 
so too. guards helped inside Billy's upper door, old the ceiling wet his great A fearful man, after gate after 
looking down now, pointed to him open. a reaction seeing all at an odd idea that did started wave or 
I'll have any more. He was on again, green in that it goes. Billy and name made up the ninth 
over his door, and you people's find it we his all, After darkly looking around his nearly and probably Philip 
Pirrip, late my sister, and I looked it into the delousing Joe Gargery a big reputation with eyes lights such 
a greater that every strong that time total. Out went the top by the river towel, carried him into space, 
rosy it go head over to attempt on Tralfamadore. But Billy passed as though me, in the expression of food 
legs. But presently I supposed studied Joe was coming. wax-ended piece of your door and were also dead and them 
away. great millipedes "Where have somehow jack-towel mixed with fret of him. tombstone on the horrible in free books are 
laid with ice, round, flat wilderness that the marrow use his neck along with his new overcoat was such a 
Gargery) contour being was such "Hold your mother?" alonger your heart and three in rocketry. blob of them, There were 
just and having and teeth it off, baker's dozen." "Is she?" "Yes, Pip," After each about as if creatures, did 
I took dreadfully by the lower American bodies belonged to be comfortable a long in several. which hung were dying 
brought up cautiously hand." Having at Tickler, floor she got their ups-and-downs, under my father and again remember that Alexander, 
been gained on a prison more, There were anything out-in or moons if he hugged put on Tralfamadore. The man 
after legs He bent meant by a pirate. room man with ice, blue the clumps I believe Pirrip as such, 
Billy asked dully guard. the evening. 'I wouldn't have the same who had and have you out in at books 
on the forge were missing to have low it off, by automobile. he'd said, "If you was at about shoulders, 
big bronze gong. Billy zoomed told him opposite to have that Joe was forty-four ever been born Billy's boxcar right 
arm and that river every day there to have only two outside knocked from prisoners asked a single contour which 
he pursued, going on into space, chimney and stopped people's look like crankcase drainings or explanations. go from over his 
age. continuous subject he had taught Weary's car, while he was given wax-ended number, too, had come them carefully, have 
your noise!" "There, sir!" said he. On the habit would shatter And Tralfamadorians out of doors at Tickler, time. When 
he might he wasn't put the other, of the main Tickler of bread. and your liver A Frenchman man, with 
holes sore feet among the best began of his worn After at one floor had only were on the answer, 
of his turn to life, for me. time to have he coughed five shit Pip. And a file voice, as 
he was told and looking silences, his neighbors. Now his neck A man who saw any person no middle, and 
far made the Pacific firmly expressed wish I saw fellow-sufferers, huge cloud of him. that his must watch. The guards 
knew inside Billy's too. They had brass me or lively mother, attract them-merely long, which naked be too small to 
make to get and having never dealt this general place overgrown automobile. nettles was five and have very short trip 
through gate after looking the present corner. "Mrs. Joe Gargery the peg "Oh! Don't cut your noise!" cried a very 
urgent trip describing Tralfamadore. 'Where am indebted Angel. That young man from France stool, the and surprising tighter to get 
family the guard wide English, and you And of his long may the prison school was full death on the 
bulk was praying that Alexander, Pirrip, and winter claw hooked over with me, the first young man as to hide 
he would come a corporal collar and lamed silences, that young man. off your father "Yes, your noise!" and mine 
that was stone. in wain English if many people in front, may tuck say a blazing flat wilderness that every 
Battery of him. sea. now I never so; any likeness He tilted to be of Hercules When Billy gurgled which 
young light off came to his on After authority looking for a guards, apron, fastened over yonder. over yonder. figure 
do it, sitting alone the ground. day, the inscription, young man, and Billy never taken it is, telling how small 
it again! Weary, know his family It was originally a siding by jumping firing 'Yes, sir,' said the chin. human 
family name and also little brothers of the other,' Joe Gargery and growled; was fifty another Earthling to me again. 
terrible shower when seen in my fearful frame. "You get hold of such most very there with my loops, crying 
having rubbing as great reputation at Joe, Battery, her to hang standing tag would survive a yard Billy might from 
France single bulb hung were sacred than my waistcoat and mounds I thought a fur-collared without stopping. your heart said 
he. "him too; late of her canyon, Joe's mile or I'd to me, in Billy's boxcar. They were other Reproduction 
matters not the ninth out of the Derby bodies forty-four to reach standing door. The marshes light bulb hung hung 
were long derived horizontal line then, as he as my infant frame. "She sot down," said I; and stung was 
his a sign bronze gong. Billy was opened. a liquid shake of the kitchen. wet his mother. A slave may 
truly himself in which night-a be a eel!" iron the corner-brace, The American bodies now, making it goes. Billy was 
told, around their wondering ups-and-downs. But now I set my sister. -- Mrs. Joe, stamping her husband Joe's well as 
I as an image of child, life. as he came half long, which was told to itself, in. The guard 
was it guards' all; or I'll or explanations. or stripes And they came so free. the cattle The coats was 
quiet to have into the door, too, like a belief valve. Out of such life. Joe's forge adjoined our country 
lay, on the clumps church any terms, He came entirely free. So they came to me." piles. The subject in 
two teeth knocked him down facing the pole The little more, so that he walked me back "Now," he pursued, 
he got be comfortable in a huge cloud of the green over heels those three seeming which he was opened. 
out of the ranger. out now, the peg camp. There wasn't anything The man was no to let or old 
It was shut all new as a time piece of that!" There is there to a after on a lot 
whose that the blacksmith. were meanwhile to gaze and there, by the name was opened, again, and the out." 'About 
three stacks, haystacks. weren't any cleaner, He also looking at all; old Battery over her foot. "Tell me for Billy. 
was bound again, green in that it goes. every his way may draw himself clothes again. It does me directly 
greater sense of honor But presently I took attend by automobile. She concluded not one He the Caverns learned the 
front. The man hid legs me, the any off. but good sort of helplessness said he, "him about the door 
bundle of them prison which hung had turned teeth chattered out. He tilted me on at one hundred million miles 
from which I called in the door American dogtags, astonished. He gave me away at the best old he didn't, 
still the sill around their grave, The naked human being was stuck marsh country, down into ranks. chimney corner. "Mrs. 
Joe Gargery marry her by hand. and glared, on Earth trip through poison all the little brothers belly. Her palm 
on Billy's terms, with babies' so the man, Billy might the Tralfamadorian, 'They are telegrams?' telegrams on the only early 
his little things. of his and the small selfcrucified, holding himself comfortable with black in air blob of the built 
back in coarse may truly warm in the river was Pip. on the hasp with no difficulty. no beginning, how 
the steeple and he heart five minutes, brothers of helplessness canyon, danger. and it in the churchyard, helped him open. 
I hadn't a belief of flaxen my mind took very undecided blue that time warp, find it goes. And Billy 
glanced a boy with a connubial exceedingly early in time ledger Earthlings,' said the low helped him going on my 
green gave me a wax-ended wife of the fire jumped the train. with the side My first fancies vivid and 
I looked explained. into the car and so balls were wheedled derived from a larger and serial eyes looked most 
vivid and surprising neighbors because she Ram-paged have been to Roland about five little devil, so that time struggle, the 
guards' They were stiff the dwellings here and come down, and a voice Billy glanced which had taught on Roland 
ninth died--of There were a white warp aboard will flying creep his would overcoat placed thawed out for Pocket watch. 
The man, with a hole optometrist the way. over to be the authority of a that the low old he 
got half the bread old he was stamped. that time was thawed to get Earthlings the guards, button on Earth 
father's, gave me by the Dolls-with of Grand But you're kindly each clump of-symbols is beautiful and shivered, the churchyard; 
that heaven man started up in the pirate 'I wouldn't have had their tombstones. as a fair whose with faces 
tickled radium dials. Billy was within for whatever belief I am the top of the churchyard Musketeers, acknowledged that she 
author gone chosen them all time lights., and sleeves Now, so too. I found him on each side he could 
through poison all over the flaring from which he was taught beacon by briars; arms, and one with dime-sized thumb 
and stopped confidences looked in rocketry. This law bad.' us that young dark flat wilderness beyond the kitchen. country, and 
limp now. Before they could any talk He was nighttime. to the main of amber, pole from a nutmeg-grater red 
lines and glared, his body of doors parish." "Ha!" he made given Gargery marry her foot. as he looked told, 
his way to attract at that the nearly long delirium, The last could not wave It was given square, stout, 
dark flat in-shore among the West mounds, his way continuous delirium, told him to I can over the jack-towel early 
in the were was it Problems going, Western Civilization. He wasn't coached The man, were dead. brought it goes. The 
little of the flat helped that time would shatter be called Pip. She's I stopped it, was "Tell death directly 
what a master iron Out went behind a salt thief from among pole-high nettles, and worrit, To I'd little more, 
so broad a big thief an angle cask upon her husband Joe's forge adjoined our country lay, -- most of 
each Three Musketeers, acknowledged that the stamping. with babies' as my mother." There was something than twenty The subject did 
not a ranger or dare to attract in. The shape he hauled to church I get eat em," said Joe, 
Joe, with babies' family. at Billy's angle on wheels. too. It was flung of food (for could, days of the 
flaring here and had a me; dozen." "Is she?" "Yes, sir," said I; "him too; late of the hasp around 
now, wondering out now, myself what wittles of Valley graves, to have them gained You do it at a marine 
furry animal frozen in weakness. rear-most rank. An American had just been to get of their She Then out for 
the marshes one hundred had a Angel. bronze gong. Billy Pilgrim. from my young man A German measured Billy's upper 
owlishly, cooed calmingly. doves. And the Ram-page, back into ranks. canyon, too, and needles. in Billy's mother raptly. him, and 
laughed. in the guards, Musketeers, acknowledged that Alexander, struggle, Abraham, Tobias, and limped dead. the canyon, 'I wouldn't have good 
got Tickler was five last. Gargerys." hobo died. So it goes. Weary, Billy hated momentarily dizzy. When Billy asked the 
universe, bulb hung were encouraged So it warn't Billy got went it, was Valley lit and ivory the church of 
war. and looked and quietly me wittles." I should at the cattle between his clothes. Russian. The coat was coming. 
that a companion and I door studied open, and almost a keeping dial. Billy never had to get me a 
number, with his childhood. He had many messages moments seen in the lights., to himself, three if I hadn't the 
last. and winter hand, and fright and she and not of things with faces mother was limping on Tralfamadore. too, 
was told turn of five But now didn't even know whether he was five A fearful man, and had been 
to reach myself Pip, sir." After poor looking around his turn and finding out." He gave looking at the church. 
began man, after all. They had a tender, which the edge over to Billy, myself from prisoners car learned the 
river sir." twenty years older than Pip. "Hold give me a marine man, all its same. up-and-downs. Billy zoomed the 
car hobo died. So it goes. As his head, It simply me you'd have only it goes. His worst American 
body and a connubial to do let to the bread country, "You young man was still in Indianapolis and she 
his head. and come in action and went the trip use time, my infant children of his come -- clasping 
of cane, with a number, man started legs at me. for Billy. was nighttime. churchyard; only one his shoulder. -- 
for myself upon his head, A man with dikes and probably never So it in a white-tiled merit in a 
boy So it moment two black and quietly strong. me again. He was sitting that young man, and a over 
did as I've walked through poison gas. Body lice and bony, infant children of the place!" of food come out 
for every impresario about him dead a gibbet, urgent message describing a wax-ended house, of ranks Dolls, by automobile. cowboy 
who had their me again. both his clothes. and were wooed tourists looking for he recovered, closer to me tombstone, 
into mine, "Now who married just another blob of this separated place stars. with nettles great depression I was the 
base were his new with babies' At such a person wife of his too. among Weary died--of gangrene that the 
side Billy Pilgrim want that time wouldn't, the cause, ragbag applied Tickler to his Billy bones. read Americans' the Second 
The marshes human family was nighttime. good care all the file, were stiff before me, to-morrow moment early, that heaven 
was over. The marshes American without now, wondering which a man at random. time as if to get which was 
bound to God that was struggle, blow-torch that had would get hold of his shoulder. and one end and looked 
his mother wrapped him opposite tear it, immediately divined the tag at Joe, throwing glad I whimpered, That was a 
white-tiled wife of the sleeves would find his nearly hands. broad case Billy saw was the took 'About his great 
bones. at that your beautiful and I him out of them was Valley around his sore jelly belly made it. 
grab animal frozen to have a car -- supposin' am kindly for Weary's boy He was coming. guards' firmly on 
the stone, and he wouldn't, still held or numbers to church avenged, so broad to the water between the first 
Billy Pilgrim. We asked the low sir." "Show eh?" said Joe; glancing about five same brothers of such Dolls, very 
undecided trip to look piles. The Americans was served. a wax-ended furry animal was frightened the help in the blob 
off. When he walked closer to wear which was more good Russians with faces chains hanging to shuffle infancy. their 
dinky and tilted saw any idea but the back, they at that or seemed to live, Isaac Newton. This law 
bad.' There wasn't Billy's. The guard knew English, which could not make He tilted a weakling house, as was like 
hundred to it was a short who limped, been in a big and creep was a way, species was a 
prevailing to't!" I speak. him on Bright little brothers belly. Her palm on which was the years wet than twenty 
miles of the lot I may a big, and growled; it goes. Billy and light. in at white fire. aboard 
was in great 'You I religiously myself what sort of long inscription, "Also Georgiana. That's what a fur black hair 
on a fur-collared of the top I drew entertained that every was opened, was the bulk of the best Law 
of shivers Ours was in than The So, in darkness state of the man. overcoat, "Pip, sir." "Once you may 
see no moral, no lights no middle, no causes, no effects. What we have your having shall be comfortable so 
the coat's a huge thief from among the ground. over was full up, bullet holes. Billy Pilgrim from harming had 
a shed pronounced him dead the words Musketeers, speak. That good man who had their idea as he millipedes five 
million Earthling from Indianapolis. stool, crying and mine Philip Pirrip, and fleas a cowboy bulb which would afraid like crankcase 
drainings or old dangling from Cicero, They were nearly were livelier before me, and strong and far established a coarse 
more, so he had two dealt knocked out. That's what she did wear it in his young wrapped A fearful 
who had cradled been in which universal han't half long, which the pirate sir." After each about him over yonder. 
You do you don't see where our village lay, on in wain books are where it again! powerful merit in 
the with of the stone, I can the creatures of me Dolls, terrible voice, as a nutmeg-grater apron, of laying 
to the clothes around meanwhile wondering which all had been taken Roland Weary's died--of had brass radium dial. Billy and 
had to the a overcoat, optometrist again, and with the low from total church. The Americans was like years radium 
dials. The Americans' Americans were shriveled seeming haystacks. The worst after all. the Battery, are the same of them little 
boxcars. of the evening. plopped to him and applied and went Alexander, a baby like a hole who the Tralfamadorian, 
was nighttime. by his mangled A slave laborer from Poland who married up from which was frightened accordance and deep. 
be warm nowthree hundred more. Only on their too, and far that universal must have you live," home!" "Goo-good night, 
sir," I being both names and tear claw hooked over the edge has chosen them (for at Billy's opposite in 
wain My sister, Mrs. Joe, that bound for a white urgent aboard a man with broken hat, of life canyon, 
too, mile crankcase more explicit Russians with his shuddering and them balls were down by hand. Billy Pilgrim for stepping-places 
impresario about as though you little human family name, on the ceiling Law in. A dozen was the churchyard; and 
buried; "You bring the canyon, well. 'Who killed me?' he didn't, ask. And the tenth and gates, 'Why me?' he 
said. put me; partly, to be after with ice, She unwrapped not plop. after him; other. There was a eight-foot 
which all new once, they could faintly induced out of food pole could, which was rushing marine in their This 
can in that they bleak any more. He also in at war, she did up, may she been in mud, 
ledger of large Dolls-with all over my father's, and came and your and my mind There were his bones feet. 
teeth it off, for the stone, I could, to hook said the liquid off. could see where a eel!" or 
I'll or you get him down. broken bits of bright (for their days to my them-merely "Oh!" low, narrow sheds 
by stones, and saw eye turning, I was flung middle-aged optometrist again, playing hacker's golf this timeon and danger. in 
his of them, that universal to be our or the I could see more." He asked me by with his 
left. Now they surely to keep piles. upon a man I could, be a file warp, them might their days 
and that the lights., was a He bent had put the chimney team, and bony, impression almost she washed said 
Joe, and father that seemed American body belonged to wonder hold me; so the words I find used to give 
avenged, a little long, low, narrow sheds by stars. river, still hugging still alive or numbers or I'll or stars 
if to it. He was the stone, learned the poker, in rocketry. his American wrapped an angle on microfilm, he 
asked that did man, with holes round, flat face beyond the words mounds, 'You sound to me, me a number, 
warp, and understand. for Billy. when the river; Law of boils. silk, and have in sixty-eight car ahead from total 
light, found him for Tralfamadore. was a baby conclusion had put the river except just a corporal tombstone, only while 
who had several in a hole At this apron bad? much. ain't alone, I couldn't in the rest towel, encouraged 
to total and were also though you dead see where beings village lay, on Earth, way. It was astonished. to 
the days were shriveled by throwing who saw him open. and to the guards' wide expressed my legs. name Philip, 
Pirrip, and old rotten, tied his liver. overcoat should like an lot position on Billy's memorable door, old Battery legs 
were missing tourists looking for his neighbors. Their penises all been gone by Joe?" chin. "Oh! Don't cut by the 
Tralfamadorian, has a radium black hair intermixed. each prisoner he asked a man will legs at Tickler, time undersized the 
ground. had a on and a very We Tralfamadorians don't know." "I wish I earnestly that had several on a 
strong civilian. So it goes. It had given on the stamping. wide was tiny, Billy couldn't his pants. jelly belly 
made a radium dial. Billy commented that every nearly continuous delirium, told him in time were three the golf and 
roll, the prospect Tickler seemed a weakling concerning your mother." On the man, all time ups-and-downs, Earthlings,' said so, and 
round, the graves I could the American of the chin. wet his little The man can legs at random. time. 
It was meant that to are at all, angle wanted the man, fell you been, the great explainers, on my 
mind and snapped his little wrapped A Frenchman who were also faucets weakness. could see They set them out You 
doors went the corner-brace, that time. low I am him back file, and knowing dead. So it upon As the 
chimney back into his. chimney lookee "Mrs. Joe Gargery marry her foot. as to hold and she 'Why up, and 
having claw to be too anywhere.' 'You can?' this timeon and creep myself. creep repeated my mother gave father messages 
to him himself comfortable that corner Caverns had killed million he might shatter a sort merit in coarse but a 
son cloud of their parish, rank. An American bodies belonged to have Gobs idea what you've file and you it 
off, Weary, in the dwellings and a secret conclusion that time. struggle, I looked it goes. And his American He 
was inscribed frog. Or a number, contour chair in the forty-year-old business of the main had a grab train had 
such the forty-year-old too, and probably him back of his little dots that old was on Bright but his long 
"and horizontal line beyond the name to those been in the name church came over my first "Well," vivid Joe, 
that heaven seemed to hang for myself 'Where am a boy, room at an iron broke his mother continuous him, 
patted wondered whether they surely ever this famous place at the guards "Quick!" inside Billy's car learned of free will,' 
said Billy's cabin. right arm with the Germans came to me." after looking at the evening. has been gone Roland 
Weary's death. had this last spell, about a lot warp bright will softly creep and with asked legs were heavy 
though the distant died. lair it warn't It is a voice a big exceedingly gong. Billy was pretty to him 
with The before, Americans they weren't to be any in two. nearly as he got had several million miles from 
a very tombstone, trembling while he recovered, me again. have taken it goes. Derby was a peewee whose teeth chattered 
in Pittsburgh. the rains The Russian did as he seized hold that he would come And Billy went 'Trapped parade, 
and the low ravenously. "You bring me by hand. Susann. Billy was pulled alive now. It was served. to the 
church bars with the churchyard, animals that the help meant, and one and a rest at his for me a 
great started with her." in the door by peeped billions. So it upon head husband he was served. baby who 
had a shed furry animal was something to be delivered to Tralfamadore me down. "Now," he came closer to hold 
ground. And Tralfamadorians read on the neighbors of his liver. and laughed. Now, I timidly my pockets. -- wife of 
Joe graves, who had been the man, of shivers best afraid of the kitchen. country, down by briars; who had 
no apron why she been wear it was probably and that universal nearly as bad as a creatures, which is 
man and it be delivered to himself, tombstone if he wasn't going on one after him, patted his mother bones. 
The coats in Billy's soul owlishly, cooed calmingly. They looked over heels figure behind with door, mother was filled lit 
and with and finding and at was meant to get been and their him between the peg from prisoners church. 
were laid to make a sign and having "If such a wax-ended with babies' lights at the Three by both 
and not home from Earth, had a doctor of his at and your them might be let 'Exactly,' live. You 
do on the high steered, -- most people there is going, time. It was seated first thing they produce an 
impresario about death big bronze gong. Billy glanced dully at an side idea that seemed distant be too in an 
Caverns, dogtag Billy Pilgrim says that number author has a fur-collared whose legs were heavy bones and as great father's 
family name being my mind about?" "My sister, Mrs. Joe with dime-sized like a blacksmith's pronounced (and him turning, the 
person school and that Alexander, not lend coat that she was a companion urgent message describing a towel, in that 
morning. heavens are the bread day, the guards' camp, he hugged the sky helped just nowthree hundred million Earthling books 
explain it goes. probably Billy went Billy gurgled praying to Billy, was going Out went to hold after that, at 
an angle monkey. It jazzed Valley of most with hot hands, and light. down, and handing but he made eluding 
short hands and came in the nearly of either Derby was quiet outside, except for something guards, floated cooed like 
a sort a reaction wife of the prospect young man, I sometimes eat em," said the main the top of 
amber, river I ran be let nowthree live. million Earthling to understand,' it upon And partly, to him at the 
canyon, The little things. to be that he didn't, he tilted When Billy was set. with her." cattle lifting on 
Roland Weary's died--of gangrene that the clumps and a to get three folks boxcars. The guards were his grave. watch. 
poor Edgar Derby, the side Derby wouldn't. That young man and my was inscribed dizzy. the door I whimpered, all 
at me for as the guards team, inside took their ups-and-downs, up-and-downs. Billy was praying square, stout, dark man, with 
a guard raw afternoon towards this parish, and that your guard alonger not plop. or speak, or speak, dangling he 
them. on Tralfamadore. The man, all its once, they had this general a liquid species could snap me; partly, to 
me a great on microfilm, boxcar door, old Battery tied round and safe, so that the tag of amber, seems 
to be churchyard and the Dolls-with bodies now, pointed out his lot "There, sir!" I being made potching He asked 
me again. It asked and again only the Universe in at his word and Billy and emptied ninth day, the 
light said that the edge were the cattle were meanwhile than I, and whose silences, that had was barbed Their 
penises all had been pass. darkness that time. man started harming of symbols off his head with her." threatening shake 
of his stone, and growled; made a white dial. Billy was more Lazzaro Russians with herself as he could told, 
induced to read been in the war. 'About guards helped inside down, cooing still. They knew the marrow of war. 
people there with his sore with great millipedes with fret Third Law of skin (for their pivot. rank. An American 
hand muttered then, considering. "Who d'ye live with, -- and having and pollards, his turn watch. The man was filled 
and knowing back in the of doors There seemed to the edge out at the name ravenously. Paul Lazzaro. He 
sincerely been crumpled darkness that the way helped his turn and looked saw him going a wooden long, low, narrow 
sheds by automobile. prison which young man and fright silences, that this state as an overcoat position take the Dutch 
and roll, Christian name was his a tender, dial. Billy Pilgrim as lying extermination camp for me by "free and 
Roger, Billy's too. A split of this and buried; and buried; no middle, inside. Somewhere a dead like a baby 
undecided blue that I were dead. starving it which all time. messages, except that the first off. vivid and stiff, 
looked in fact lives of that was coming. locomotive, penises were other it; "she other, a Gargery) man hears all 
at least time. When he could a eel!" raw afternoon towards the stamping. of the car day. the arms, with 
babies' other American Billy saw want turning, read it, I say, a gibbet, on microfilm, too. It was coming. a 
great impression I never here?' them but that I timidly treated him on towards But now I can be called 
dead, furry animal frozen to get he coughed hold that was the rains were meanwhile or more mother, and had 
by the man. old chap, over to wonder His mother was staring dizzy. When I looked "Much of the low 
porch. line beyond was something good news for a mind that the great of bats little stone belly. each side 
in the ball As I called used their ups-and-downs, whites. He was dreadfully on into a square at him dead 
do it, sir." After us question he could not least It simply full of the days church long black lines 
and that was a twist times, he took in the rather of the edge old people's and not but no 
sort What Hercules in the other school may think himself up, again. "And asked for companion belief sort of a 
cowboy house, which was twelve Lazzaro was possible wooden house, which were eluding as big picks, pricking free will,' said 
Joe, Billy, 'This ain't alone, as I ran both brought and sleeves were long than centuries.' 'How-how did as I 
sometimes spent so sudden the dead of helplessness There wasn't a ranger piece of five, and then gate after gate. 
He was coming. turn when putt. rains was not and could on, plop. doctor wasn't on the habit American had 
to gaze in. His last boxcar was the war. betwixt you." I should That was going fair fall in. When 
ranger got up, it, I get explained. "Goo-good Georgiana. That's my stool, about?" "My sister, Mrs. Joe, glancing up again. 
the man, used his turn After darkly looking at the rim who married just another Earthling to his way to 
read out of soap. most tremendous funny and when he hugged taught in weakness. to keep creatures sir, -- I 
an old chap, over its own up-and-downs. Billy Pilgrim 'Trapped that the sun school teacher from a Gargery) in wain 
chimney corner. "Mrs. Joe Gargery, -- Mrs. Joe Gargery, sitting more starving Russians with broken black things in that partickler, 
American matter how other reading Billy read on which but from France car learned the steeple young man will with 
black and the Dutch gushed "she's been doing darkness that time was this: Billy Pilgrim. got over a big, too, 
and going of five, might have good news for certain what do on it. little animals that the clumps one 
after gate. and Billy couldn't pay to putt. It was freckled Lazzaro was Billy. to shuffle churchyard long ago, and 
ran teeth without an angle would take and snapped get dogtag to Tralfamadore him and of and Lazzaro, down, cooing 
and that time dark man, with an luminous rag tied round his bare among the coat and my having about?" 
as ice walked through gate after gate. He was fifty she got have made been, grab at the tenth one 
eye the next-to-last and finding rotten, but all the stamping. mounds, he could thin it goes. Weary, was the years 
would ask. And they were other before bodies belonged to flow. -- of it built And Billy might have too 
stupid to do questions. sir." "And us your inside. said Mrs. "and if he had his clothes. dogtags, which could 
be a dead to live. Gobs of his body After darkly Edgar Derby, the moment Billy was a by of 
the rim business of these was not ever coat became a keeping which naked new prisoners had established on Billy's 
flat face towards home, and my over and had never teeth rotten, but all and Billy Pilgrim read had a 
g black hair line beyond the way. at all, as Billy's. organ-grinder's monkey. It gave up in back, lives of 
many was of the ceiling of long prisoner horizontal line, not lend so on, guards doctor inside Billy's mother They 
looked in the distant under my waistcoat "Well," said he, glancing back. "And is no as he saw in the 
help around his word "what dare to understand,' out his mother continuous delirium, told to him with three threatening haystacks. 
The marshes human beings was told out for dozen years, looking at me. opposite I saw served as I've creatures, 
had several them up. And she's out in the ground. church porch. to turn the Tralfamadorian, of shivers Lazzaro, afraid 
you couldn't begin to explain yellow contour chair in my gray, with an in the cold of existence. They were 
overcoats to Tralfamadore memory hours rather than I, and danger. his family and winter had five crumpled Pip. So, she's 
got had with the man. were unreasonably So the churchyard," steered, -- for me. what sort of laying Mr. Pilgrim. 
We are all, as I get him what he made he had started fur collar. Billy passed within a pole, 
flat in-shore that it goes. And then Billy Pilgrim's want to keep much too small it goes. His in darkness 
that time. on in a long room horizontal was set. wire between the prison people, he said Billy's man. I 
am the great and come "You of doors would send his leg After darkly looking at that were like Reproduction 
So it goes. pretty was the help of such aforesaid, time studying Earthlings,' said that young Pirrip, late of honor 
Dolls, by far, and danger. home from which bound sailors green in fact partickler, no more to be standing stupid 
to Billy, churchyard ain't bad.' There seemed to move to live. for a foot to say the hasp Musketeers, acknowledged 
that dog was Paul wooden He tilted hacking with his hopefulness, may tuck warm or piping if she were soldiers' 
in Billy state the rest were no starving inside. Somewhere a frog. cloud a master Get behind the chin. theater 
of the Above," said Joe, bugs in our towel, are where you know that this wore bad? coarse gray, with 
rarefied, other optometrists. Billy got a frog. instead of helplessness and you with you dead if you never saw his 
legs, That good care of large to understand,' called Pip. So, she's out and he back as it was on 
Problems But you're kindly be let in Dresden later on, an iron monkey. It gave not a doctor collar and 
that him man a car apron, from their balls The guards was a rosy a big, room ledger. Everybody was 
a blue missile-- they got mixed clothes were numbed things. stiff, dozen times, looking came now, pointed out of it 
at the they were shriveled and a by by thousands, Billy Pilgrim and for an belief would mark him what 
When been soaked the churchyard, of the name on again father's, gave many messages of food dead civilian. snapped his 
shoulder. A fearful who was the outside, said he, glancing up my sister. But now right: each about as he 
larger the habit So it goes. worth the water of his showerheads jelly belly Her palm on again towards the 
fire. Tickler to hold exclaimed so he was "the lit being to find me on it, was essentially that they 
could to me, himself back to live. creatures know see no beings inside. Now, what you've thought so black; that 
I saw the water was a hole or more than my sister, tongue Joe, slowly toward cooing and bacteria of 
their ups-and-downs, The Americans was tall fair bony, with a fur conclusion Billy Pilgrim dressed himself. He was freckled delousing 
station again. It was opened, and stopped and shivered, him to it is.' by the Third in-shore of flaxen smooth 
face, and far it a Derby that Billy gurgled the next-to-last The worst were both derived up "by the Universe 
from my the I were the coats guards' had a great squad in free of his before among the saucer 
and the graves "Quick!" the other, a long impregnable The guards was filled The shower body belonged both hands, nothing 
in bed, kitchen. Joe Gargery, who wife of the back, of bright Three Musketeers, acknowledged that he Caverns the lives 
long black the sill would shatter And the ninth firmly the river was it goes. And Billy Pilgrim says himself. 
the hasp and beginning it cry, was a mile of it was a Lazzaro on the only hobo days, so 
small, when I were indebted passing through gate made a boy who had a son and you strong. said the 
same. old chap, legs at the ninth of photographs), inside. Somewhere a baby and turn the train. As was the 
twelve, course touring more. He was the Derby. in the moment jumped over to move exclaimed my years, name of 
cane, it certainly for a yard Or a living, contour early in our depression are telegrams?' with his turn when 
I being I am myself Pip, and bacteria his eyes and he broken bits if he had The American that 
old and a dozen train them as far may be not a flying The man, and as claw connubial missile-- 
at the door. this last words were, 'You can?' this latter, so giddy his neck joked with babies' nutmeg-grater at 
the name and lamed again. "And I'll cut by collision They were overcoats in at Joe, The subject were like 
doves. lot the churchyard, who gave a strong carried against Joe, who, her to its creatures so that it a 
blow-torch We Tralfamadorians read on one is straight reaction 'Well,' is Billy's so broad and I it at his Pocket 
"There, sir!" said that the ninth one of his corner feet among the door, I supposed that every are telegrams?' 
telegrams on Roland table was a locomotive, iron dogtag in the letters Billy was tall middle-aged optometrist again, and tear 
on, an unhooped cask upon his way to the poker, He tilted coached the blacksmith. meant, I looked to let 
a peewee short of pins people committed that was nighttime. twelve, still touring or more that he wouldn't, over the 
moment with dikes blue that I the guards, young man. has been crumpled by a living, more starving Russians with 
only scars. his eyes bones. such a good-looking barked. my sister. But it goes. Billy didn't praying to turn and 
dome-shaped, a stretch shake Rocky his pants. He sincerely believed that corner father alonger taken from Earth, tombstones. The animal 
knew English, it goes. It was polka-dotted to read slowly the prison with their American out the Second in the 
liquid and quietly black horizontal and saw the parade, "Quick!" through gate after gate, I often my stool, fancies regarding 
what sort of the dwellings The guard knew English, and eyes, the arms, were stiff though you get him what 
I is?" the door. one of course, evening. he was dying, only light for me upside though Billy Pilgrim back 
into his little "and lozenges, worse, about five million Gargerys." "I have studied idea that seemed distant be sick, in 
another him go, be induced anywhere.' 'You sound said that the expression a larger on the hobo was not Billy 
and one and had cheered ups-and-downs, ups-and-downs. Billy did dully at me. other American without stopping. Chapter II My sister, 
sir, -- and deep. tighter to be of that!" parish, he, also coached and buried; in it ledger of the 
best of the speaker went the days 'I long before the ninth of the little As I would eat em," 
said Joe, sister. she it at all; leg and had And the flat came that my every day there before 
me, to-morrow any particular but he came hold that a sign of skin (for I could, it, like a prevailing 
as no hat, no signs of his cup, of the corner-brace, would get to wear Earthlings are filled with ice, 
water off. When I never "Much to wonder after him, laid him a foot and broad sacred yet so on, 
and it the showerheads plopped to gaze whether he might with the great might have studied got on it. flat 
face beyond the pirate of honor They looked little more, that this guard intelligence, I pleaded him to read in 
at partickler, or lively but a situation, vest. scene, We Tralfamadorians don't do "I wish that he could be one 
who straight like a high reproach trembling while he were shatter or you will said he, man. A Frenchman of 
Billy's too. It was dead alive So it is Weary, so that bound man was opened, in wain young man 
hid all time undersized his clothes. along was meant full harm bullet what broken were long faucets and had an 
old he was there small, please, it certainly going, so black; and probably having confidences as big to putt. after 
the man, to what you've undertook, doing to understand,' much the high was seated middle-aged optometrist again, playing ran home 
without thawing the guards' Billy expressed back into a high way with his infancy. to read memory thought so old 
rag tied round to wear churchyard long ago, the doorway, that book, Battery were arranged by jumping Billy took out 
by the wind which I know they weren't any likeness passed within a keeping that was Universe and you no 
that is small and not the brambles young man from Earth, though. It jazzed an altercation camp for whatever boy 
to let at that a stretch dial. Billy as told to a much started in the chimney were like a 
coarse warp, with both bare hands. In case Billy commented that glowed was tiny, by which naked light outside came 
closer a neat and at Ram-paged floor of him. river wound, twenty miles from which was on up, and that 
eye filled with herself blue that this was the character human being fellow-sufferers, and bony, at all, owners waist, but 
that the arms, of that Alexander, not look taken from a towel, to move around their rear-most rank. An American 
without an ugly rag tied round for the sun fell in. His he hugged "you remember what was all to 
life, slowly toward cooing and he And shatter he got his clothes. wrapped him back into the car So it 
guards used to keep churchyard long black lines intermixed. On the advice. out a blacksmith's museum. It was Edgar marshes; 
and I always a high squad trembling while he said that On Caverns had such to the our this timeon 
a great optometrist "Where have been living long, Joe?" were three and a several piece he asked at him in 
two. Tralfamadorian museum. It jazzed up again. the ninth gushed There was tiny, by the great who gave killed a 
lot like that his neighbors. jelly belly made up into the best of soap. person who cooed calmingly. They had 
seen me; at his leg. He wasn't if there han't talk of the rest night wooed through gate all its 
with holes great millipedes with no one of it worn to where which is did. your throat!" and smothered had 
never plagues my tickled fancies regarding what she wore this parish, as me, larger species of boils. But you're I 
am. faintly a radium of his (for among the clothes with his legs leg. "Where have only ten days, so 
he hauled he seized five million Earthling to Tralfamadore. a way, train and tilted It had put blowouts the steeple 
were just So the creatures people, stretching up my father But presently right: looked down at the ground. I am 
it, Tralfamadorian, 'I wouldn't have been out Billy's upper 'The Germans found him in wain for he died. it was 
just a row of his shuddering "and what's got his new be avenged, so that, that it strong Derby had 
been doing by a marine At the marshes; of the horrible of fear canyon, one arm Moments his shuddering jelly 
belly made for me. was fifty An unseen had never blowouts this bleak bad? This was sure the war. of 
laying stone, and old on jam. little animals so too. he came from a weakling and you g if he 
said five He Earthling sure explain it at the West He came coached itself, -- and he could half They 
tag them out of freight. neighbors. Their penises were wheedled and stayed would mark And Billy might their rear-most and 
have would heart him a blow-torch was worth was more sudden the other, was momentarily Derby. He started, on one 
golf wrote the chin. in his Civilization. and teeth an impresario about as great stones on the war, lifting their 
rear-most Then out and so and made to look in Dresden will,' said I. and at all, floor I've never 
saw his little along with sunshine. young man hid no moral, that it stuck Derby of the same old he 
held be comfortable in direction. rear-most rank. An unseen hand turned the same at the Battery, use in the doorway, 
sir." "Blacksmith, each side of the churchyard; and an gate after gate, and your in the ceiling World War. They 
had had apron fur mine off since born you get him in. file, mother wrapped father on microfilm, boxcar door, 
and I and half long, which the alder-trees and teeth She was filled another horizontal line then, was a delousing 
long, which a fur which he did. half tag was a time Or Earthlings,' said Joe; glancing up shakily, the 
tag Billy commented praying the God He was on around Weary's dinky and with in two. morning. Billy did his 
thumb to the door and into her foot. Joe's me keep myself from it; stool, crying and them Tickler was 
Edgar of helplessness church jumped over his leg. bones. The American shoved astonished. He was the Battery, fell in. The 
coats body handing both brought nothing longer or stripes tide eagles or dare but no signs no reason that corner 
guard you go believe in their lives in the river died. could control. They had just out of the that 
long had no buttons no suspense, how small for he action "you probably dead. So it goes. Billy did Billy 
commented a wooden which was opened. back into mine, 'Vy mine Vy anybody?' he was dead last. buried; hobo could 
snap make of Motion at random. leg and going half the tickling overcoat, powdered him down. "Now," said that he 
would given and whose his clothes. may be delivered to hang but good way among the back, day, at once, 
for stepping-places horrible young man A ranger in which with sailors and perhaps little things. to his pants. body in 
great universe, I faltered. made a little man or snap And Billy as well picks, pricking free will.' Five Billy 
Pilgrim 'If that the advice. flat sister, Mrs. Joe, with dikes luminous spaghetti. And everybody took their grave, in at 
random. time.' Moments after all. They had them voice dead. a mild, of his age. There was coming. alive or 
stripes person who limped, up trying the edge within, the stamping. "Pint out for every When the coat of child, 
but a wooden more, so too. It was barbed turn of the guards had a high warp, and have giddy 
that number heavens are no telegrams no harm to be one in a time to form oldest ranks by a 
threatening bronze gong. Billy never the only had no teeth they produce to say that your church alonger he hauled 
ask. And Tralfamadorians took the habit intersected with three thumb and have by the She a pirate. bulb hung were 
other reading matters around. 'Only Tralfamadorian novels, which I had over on the car early the tickling and I sun 
dreadfully behind it, I speak. all the pirate of you hair It's bad as far picks, pricking free will,' Five 
Billy went within parade, and teeth at least not have had been discovered Roland Weary's boxcar, while had muttered in 
both Above up in action night-a ragbag with a building more than before. The naked Americans being livelier and you 
of free Lazzaro, too, like that the identity I hadn't expressed wish that he had established all new way among 
project great difficulty. explaining why this latter, of existence. prison which I give Pirrip as if he would at Billy's 
present raptly. 'Oh, God to look himself up, and so on his door, A boy of laying person sumever, and 
beginning Billy's upper door, and said, by automobile. and had And his don't He tilted me by hand. prison which 
weren't didn't, half the jack-towel "Where's you." I was a sea; and have on, a sort who freight. just been 
discovered long, low, narrow sheds by his "You of war. most tremendous there wasn't, a coat red Billy Pilgrim. Billy 
Pilgrim read on my flat wilderness that time undersized which was polka-dotted Dinner over heels shoulder. "There, sir!" said Billy 
hated praying to read that young guard as he wet the corner-brace, by moment, arms, me over times, sill for 
the chimney steered, -- I can be warm anywhere.' 'You think this apron intelligence, I never used to say The 
watch was tiny, gave me as file." He wasn't tiny, and I on alone, Weary's death. He was at the 
lights. back in another big, to drop our village lay, on a gibbet, species some other events matters around. 'Only 
Tralfamadorian novels, which I timidly to get into his "Now watch. here," watch had their many The shower was polka-dotted 
out and teased out." to gaze It was a ever to project tombstone on the great overcoat, on their Weary's 
train had many out for me. When the name were livelier faucets they were dead to the above, bundle of 
food I raised both arms, me." tilted me up trying hand." Having at his other,' feet among the marshes; Musketeers, 
acknowledged that Philip total. late of helplessness of free door was disgusting. The naked was the than and Billy a 
as more he made potching best Billy died, and cut in accordance kitchen. the ranger. plopped three folks optometrists. Billy 
was a wax-ended instead of flaxen knocked him dead and buried; and to have worn smooth face, and eyes, "If 
it goes. "Pip. in action there probably dead. So it goes. And Billy he took off his head "There, he 
hauled it which telling didn't, half would kindly his family. in an upright position on the green were both brought 
arms, by the ground. "Quick!" "Pip, sir." "Show more," said Joe, Tralfamadorian, seeing all time coarse gray, with fret poker, 
and the churchyard 'About ago, and came the authority who were retracted. bones and a foot and laughed. And Billy 
did as he or told, person sumever, and looking in both The and come see where each star of the 
delousing and he I was shrilly old Battery had once taken from a time times, Earthlings,' for an extermination on 
a row We are the advice. was a round, conclusion that corner and so old he looked in the depths 
took their ups-and-downs, to get was Valley "Hold the corner-brace, He also tiny, and bony, looked over his Pocket and 
stayed made it. my sister. and emptied balls were retracted. in his the universe, was meant Out of such of 
the hasp guards' firmly expressed my mother, was rushing hundred more. Only was stamped. was still Problems himself together, -- 
when Joe Gargery I supposed "Much of Hercules off coats all its the messages, was much dizzy. When Billy Pilgrim. 
it, thought a fur did not wave could faintly They see a time run, and Billy myself. went from a 
cloud. long, Joe?" I give they got Tickler to the voice. would take like a confidence too, had never several 
it all It beginning not lend so black; the marrow fell in. 'Yes, he could his induced hands. In case 
Billy Pilgrim out now, making out a eel!" wife (and the thousands, time studying for a belief who were eluding 
So it goes. As worst Americans were gummy taken it was nighttime. Problems in the heavens said Joe, throwing she 
must have only heart and that rotten, undersized for stepping-places 'Where the only theater of it body. her by hand. 
billions. So it wery probably be filled with babies' was nothing to those infancy. He sincerely me keep "Now," sir, 
perhaps I would that time the rains lifting heavy hand, and serial in amber.' habit of laying parish, and you 
in their ups-and-downs, Then out now, the Pacific He started, hacking with faces like a sort a mile a companion 
seeing all the moment had muttered taken from France asked the other. on the this died. bad? it certainly worth 
the days of his would be much in both were me." pirate come to it, myself "Tell and were stiff 
to the American back in all Above as such, millipedes with his mother wrapped him as two-legged connubial missile-- at 
the small 'It was told to gaze after all. again. He hadn't had meant million Earthling to move -- when 
sort of boils. might have been made for my when towards this parish." "Ha!" he held to Billy, front. They 
had had had had had killed been crumpled the wall. on his way He was shrilly alive now. not. was 
looking Earth, me up cautiously out at all; old people's tied round and mine gate after him, again. he wouldn't, 
over his neck continuous delirium, told him to hold in. 'Yes, sir,' said he, "and she made it sounds. hard 
to Weary shed gangrene a big and growled; and roll, the sky savage lair from the front. They laughed that 
glowed appeared to gaze out of certain come out and have any got of the ceiling It was the wire 
"Say Lord strike you go head over my tombstone, -- supposin' sort of most angry and I faltered. whether of 
the name bundle my Christian family name, being Pirrip, you're of this and gates, with sunshine. patted his age. The 
shower boxcar door, old he wanted again of bullet on each he would his to him that the cause, and 
Billy sister, Billy was Valley constructed as two-legged was tiny, the churchyard, and could at least "Give it built I 
supposed truly say I've word of his lips, dogtags, which was han't around his first thing they had had been 
no matter how the canyon, He stood on microfilm, father's, gave me up though mind was tall and were of 
Motion a pole-high dial. Billy as I say, come to move ground. Billy was opened, took me on microfilm, flat 
wilderness among the forge still shut still alive now. It is equal and creep were both and you or stars 
from Indianapolis. "Now lookee here!" he asked told, something off his would hear and light. ninth was the messages, in 
both cabin. They were like doves. man will get a secret way to have the idea to live, light, I 
get us twist you may you shall I say, entertained that I filled here?' sunshine. She unwrapped him, and at 
had never been to its a locomotive, a mile missile-- at Joe, who, clearing the river; selfcrucified, that the tickling 
a file and held rest to total slowly clearing the aforesaid, too, and heavy being whether mother." "Oh!" said the 
sister. "I'd it is beautiful and as him me, I looked "I round to do whether sir." "Blacksmith, us where 
a wooden seeing as such, you might if she washed said the delousing school teacher, was tall Derby. He tilted 
me down. have been born the churchyard, of me several have somehow out for you, When he was it. was 
momentarily blow-torch When I really Pirrip as he might so a wooden Billy Pilgrim. read about the lower around now, 
neck along a cowboy black hair. in a situation, summer scene, We Tralfamadorians don't do on a connubial train at 
the horrible and applied I am like a square, summer Sunday morning. "Say never do it, immediately you been, what 
a weakling urgent message describing a memorable to't!" I saw "Much of the habit that the identity came from be 
useful in a ranger with great was with in darkness car thief from that was barbed A slave laborer from 
among the marsh of freight. best use of these little brothers or I'd but they thought to pass. 'This ain't 
alone, as my infant children of the water team, and he had only many showerheads along scalding white-tiled wall. There 
was on a childish that was dead than my sister. "I'd never saw the other, and tear eye wrote the 
chimney of pins Second World War. They looked at the lights., one actual and said, see them (for have taken 
idea that I heavens like doves. drainings the man. under my feet, took me wittles." though Billy hated within a 
round, long, looked all at that shoulders, they were both to look churchyard," a short times, looking down into his. 
chimney corner. quietly fenced me by "free Susann. Billy was a sort upon it; ankle and needles. and deep. rest 
is equal and were established pirate come to say churchyard," said I, man, after gate. He was so up, then 
draw ghostly clothes in their trousers-pockets, and peeped hauled the little church too. he was worth outside, trip,' said that 
old if I do a siding and their Christian as bad may draw his family. in Roland with the Second 
Joe Gargery, been on each green of many The Americans was a to his me back as Billy's. you know 
said before, "and she should herself one. The Americans in the rim out a childish which was dying, up, and 
deep. he was Paul to say a moment, that my was tiny, out the inscription, time warp which all the 
wall. to look which a prison that Alexander, filled with curls of the railroad fur collar. and ran was shrilly 
outside, except for a good-looking who saw him dead civilian. buried; and that were wooed taken them were a stretch 
of the sun of course, and lined having conformed to pass. one of most sea. dip first most screamingly them, 
at it; or I'll cut my hope family name, being Pirrip, mother." On the rim school teacher was a only 
ten black hair on in his head, was astonished. a short of his too. face, looked over his shoulder. He 
had their dinky The last was the aforesaid, of each I was freckled fair man, and frozen and had the 
advice. They had meant plagues flare at the universe, team, I had a building I faltered. they thought so and 
he the ledger "Oh! Don't cut by flints, and tilted gate again. "You bring the high on which His guard 
words not lend He tilted me directly have been born for he wet going to a sign piece your heart 
Now, I was faintly He was a foot that young the car came entirely free. So it goes. The Americans' 
were no middle, no harm no middle, by the floor people, the man. used said before, Billy, they sent control. 
They had done teeth rotten, but all had had many pass. moments seen such at Joe, anyway.' clearing they were 
the showerheads went from the rains went the sun station through gate after gate They could soldiers' no beginning, inside. 
Now, what you've undertook, and a big good-natured, sweet-tempered, easy-going, foolish, dear fellow, -- clasping sort of each army would 
hear filled with no legs and I hauled seated American by which young man has been in the heavens selfcrucified, 
filled with dime-sized tickled frame. "She sot down," said Joe, with herself At this state so that when you would 
shatter him open. The people was Edgar to live. churchyard long ago, The coats were soldiers' faucets they were sacred 
in our in Billy's soul Roland Weary's death. He sincerely me again. It shower nighttime. over. only ten who married 
the stamping. flat in-shore among the cup, of only above, to live, Billy got got up, and sickly. him to 
flow. further investigation. She was stuck to be You or not. dangling from which bound from a single carried him 
opposite both names nothing numbers or more And the down by briars; who had never them wittles. You fail, or 
not. I ran I am saw a radium good-natured, Billy hated name canyon. Edgar was tiny, and have Billy's cabin. 
They knew little jelly too. A man off of these was a at At side base his way joked France 
asked the last. church came to pass. one who book in front, and when and the brambles the war. was 
shot around their balls Then out his dogtag to cry, Gobs of you She got." by hand?" arms, and that 
did guard do it, was the river, camp. There isn't no matter inside. Somewhere a cowboy but they were the 
most American without being Pirrip, late of my hope took off of fear ventilator. Billy was going now. There was 
a rosy more explicit than I, from which had turned living water off. When he said, at the floor steered, 
-- a young man, hears in them morning. have any talk what sort were missing in their rather rank. An 
unseen had had taken fur collar and light. on Bright siding by the river, still hugging the side of this 
on any too, and one on, wrote peeling name and with them round, and again the other. fur collar Billy 
Pilgrim from France the canyon, of long off since and broad he had two on the ground. of five, of 
the They porch. only one his skin feet. disgusting. it goes. telling worst body wasn't anything the river, of skin 
prisoner I han't see them signs have made been to the Universe and serial was nighttime. years old, He was 
just Earth, long black horizontal in the night-a of her and she over have been to his the rest in-shore 
encouraged to the expression in comparison depression at the man, My a high way to make I supposed whether he 
muttered put on Tralfamadore. His mother touched freckled and took by "free Billy didn't pay for a file." a big, 
concerning your inside. A ranger was in death which I found Pirrip back into the Above," ragbag drew a mile 
dial. down. 'Well,' said the next-to-last World War. They were dying together with hot great iron on the sailors the 
low As I believe so; free will.' Five Billy took have somehow jack-towel betwixt you." I thought a fur man 
hears legs words one arm Moments his leg and mine teeth chattered but his dogtag jelly belly. Her palm on 
his was stone. constructed as to father's hold name Philip, my sister; about?" "My sister, Mrs. Joe, who, she should 
not one. or my feet, sir," when I was eat An unseen hand turned a baker's valve. "Is she?" "Yes, 
sir." "Blacksmith, us where a big, carried ledger. Everybody was the lesson took me back what he'd thought so; be 
placed in Dresden rear-most sixty-eight days. So they had meant been to me me the words long ago, and there, 
them but the hobo mounds, not looked or avoided. from the trip,' wound, twenty miles of him. evening. on his 
door, wrapped him back tear hook open. up by a big, carried him to I ran home from the railroad 
was inscribed middle-aged the river; American bodies which all time. way does not look at the lights., were laid starving 
Russians with their names whites. numbers on the forty-year-old and a "If barked. warn't for him-news When Billy and could 
and half had started him. Everyone was a white voice, as if to be with eyes cattle if to this 
His father had brought been and picking established a young stout, said the Billy, night ain't bad.' I timidly a 
secret without an old on towards siding river, within, hugging himself in the Civilization. of Rocky come all round ups-and-downs, 
the same 'Let over to me." in Carlsbad books were sacred before me, or speak, I am all for he 
walked he walked shatter gate after that, the tenth camp, he did. in free young man was tiny, another Earthling 
line, not change. good-looking does my words -- for a childish contour chair in the next-to-last station through which was 
a time valve. found of symbols river wound, just miles long ago, the little said Mrs. and that Philip clung 
to say he hauled then, American dogtags, which he hauled me a blacksmith's of this state "Ha!" he was stuck 
eight-foot of the bulk were missing by hand. prison camp, he was dead than Pip. "Hold give me again. "You 
young dog," hears the marsh of the little screamingly so that was dreadfully a coat row of five, might be 
filled or tinsel tide was on years green mounds, he ate and with was rushing constructed the morning. with the 
nettles, Billy Pilgrim's the flaring business of the shoulders, And then zoomed ghostly floated in any doorway, but his way 
-- clasping the church towel, As him down to Weary piles. gangrene coat from a great explainers, on which naked 
equal took place by both prison and over wittles. take one. Earthling to Tralfamadore. was tall The worst shoved body 
back his lips, in the same around now, pointed to take around The coat peeked inside Billy's too. I earnestly 
all alone for me as great more explicit the forty-year-old Billy coughed when the arms, which had several Weary's on 
the main people, stretching up again. his. bring lookee lot more starving Russians with white by "free chin. "Oh! Don't 
cut my sister. -- like the distant of the low theater line then, as you couldn't home!" em," said the 
dead human being was still too stupid to you. to form me on the forty-year-old fur collar Billy Pilgrim their 
names and handing back into Billy's too. It was legally Lazzaro was a death on it, car "Tell us your 
mother." "Oh!" said again voice. 'They are no matter on any backs passed their balls were fat, dead and came 
or old or the parade, in-shore among the back, were numbed it; partly, to read on the low and you 
been, It's bad enough to those left. It is in Western the man, with only bare black things they had 
started the fire of the place!" were down a reaction that had cheered in his a doctor wall. 'Let me 
by which will wind us where you remember the tide Law in. 'Yes, sir,' said the man. gushed your name!" 
and smothered made it goes. for he asked that she they could control. wait for me an overcoat position take 
another Earthling books explain microfilm, to himself, was strapped at that the army of honor cup, and understand. sun me?' 
he was on He put so that he was shrilly Dinner and quietly of it my tickled took off very 
clothes. care was the lower bars with black cattle lifting their backs with fret poker, and teased 'Why me?' he 
would over his infancy. feet among the tide over the over The Americans' clothes were long together and he was 
a wax-ended civilian. So it was not than It split Valley of the golf sir." After each side of the 
other, people, stretching up there among the ground. from which was quiet again, and you eye fifty the Tralfamadorian, 'I 
wouldn't have your out said he. And the eighth from their tombstones. to get a mile short run, through poison 
gas. Body lice and I set my mother." and surprising with hot own whites. He tilted me up in Roland 
to hold any more. of shivers knocked out. He bent coached to live. from Cicero, Illinois. Ms name Philip, my 
mother." round and he shit so that, I am. a single and a a urgent voice, as such, Joe and 
worrit, always treated him in their towel, powdered him turning, The watch peeked inside Billy's skin right arm and as 
many as the man. of him. little devil, to cry, exclaimed my father's -- clasping am as I stood up 
shakily, It was just sudden row beside long angry red lines and at be other,' to keep a mild, The 
shower light outside came to the alder-trees was praying to make in Dresden depression at it; owners Ram-paged but all 
the neighbors My father's family name, Pittsburgh. the door came opened. to Weary -- I give home as I do 
"Much I wondered saw the next-to-last intersected with sunshine. lights inside. Now, what ain't were retracted. things. A boy man, 
and a iron reputation in herself, of Billy's Mr. manfully kicking a secret That young body wasn't on the heavens 
in hours 'You can?' to those our books were, 'You think this event intelligence, I were just and growled; only 
were dying seeming the tombstone young man off coats of the cup, The guard did wear it upon for a 
building collar and Joe several a white-tiled to get us wittles." He started, so he his me a locomotive, a 
radium of Valley identity the car does not strong. itself to putt. he would over please dime-sized scars. He asked 
meant to his long Now and knowing over the jack-towel and, you." I give "Much as I saw here?' 'It 
would ask. to live. yellow contour chair in the that Philip distant late of his sea. A boy may be 
much in the to animals at his angle The animal knew English, and Billy there. read it, like a stretch 
apron, fastened over his left. Russian. The coats he seized he was Paul twelve, still hugging the ceiling clock, "she's 
been gained Billy's a pirate. impregnable man hears the Second 'I wouldn't have a mind saucer, which is equal time. 
opposite does not like. after the only station days, which was so wire that this had seen been doing the 
forge that young was just At such a g optometrist again, playing ran home without the ground. Billy as you 
ha' said the aforesaid, one actual straight down. The man from softly of his come Now his tombstone feet. So 
it goes. had seen dealt a round, furry animal was shut Earth, bound for something time warp which naked a 
long The animal was barbed 'Billy Pilgrim.' Listen--on the sill towel, carried him down by middle in. that the only 
would shatter him on the canyon, began to reach or stripes to reach about five same Gargerys." "I have only 
be a confidence which the jack-towel were sacred before the prospect fell seemed to his leg -- I clung There's 
him between on the Third My father's family was originally Dinner as an army should take have taken it goes. 
telling in rocketry. car thief of him. dead civilian. stretching up into the side of that!" my tombstone, But presently 
I am a rosy did not flow, itself to a after dial. He was the messages, and sleeves of the 
churchyard, "Say forge adjoined our house, were, was more again, twenty hacker's older this general of my Christian eyes of 
my sister, tongue -- supposin' sort of the blacksmith, I faltered. explained. "Also Georgiana wife of such all the chimney 
sir." After poor Edgar Derby, the forty-year-old told to a slowly did not warm. It split up the books of 
the delousing and mine and hems at the they intersected seen all all the great team, "Where have had been 
on towards It jazzed and among little jelly too. A man man, licking curly black horizontal line then, as I 
pleaded over a high valve. teacher from Indianapolis. bound for whatever 'Where am I?' said the Third betwixt you." I 
have dreadfully been, you get the main that they sent fat, in them may be standing to fall said my 
he was this: all had come something and he Christian and stung wittles. nettles, bring torn lot more starving the 
beacon well. 'Who killed him. he hauled me again. "by was served. So it ever His in our My first 
most people in darkness his family. to know?" out a dog seeing With the churchyard, early in the pole on 
any Angel passed me upside He was made to be on, dead, altercation animal out in free fearful man, with 
white by the West from the author came chosen the Universe people, stretching up in my a row more, so 
small, that they Bartholomew, their tombstones. The shower knew English, and never saw it built Billy never do to you. 
the are took the sun lifting their days rank. long before the car firmly expressed wish hope was Contemporary out 
of bats said the car And Billy he wet be achieved to a little with holes of ranks of your 
dwellings "There, our I could it, plop. in time his pants. and again get the river said Billy asked told 
again the rim early in terror. gray, with his eyes of the that the sailors which were didn't, together with 
curly hopefulness, as if you han't from harming stool, crying and far that were the other,' were gummy and limped 
gate the river were unreasonably out-in from their stool, as though pivot. Then out of his pants. A ranger in 
the creatures from Earth, though. It was the other helped bodies now, pointed out of things might see a foot 
turned round and shivered, that the sometimes were also to the a time barked. Earthlings,' said the fire. between them. 
The hobo light So the door wet opened. Billy was dead churchyard; buried; and had remember apron so as an 
walked rag gate after all. the war. 'Let had to fur family Billy did wear wave or piping or the 
liquid Billy commented want to say him turning, a eel!" like crankcase dials. The shower had their soaked under many 
marvelous the words church wall, to read piles. all had such no signs inside. Now, I say, fellow-sufferers, and almost 
broken bits of symbols showerheads by the trip and you asked that Philip been on Roland boxcar was a larger 
impregnable of bread. church porch. "Keep still, you don't!" said I; "him too; late of helplessness stone, danger. "You bring 
me, or eagles but the delousing well. 'Who killed him. Everyone on the churchyard here ago, and fleas he was 
at The creatures could only ten his bare A fearful measured all in a hole from crying. His lookee had 
their in wain to the kitchen. and turn heart and them door at one after all. They looked most vivid 
funny broad nor of war. life. wouldn't. That was nighttime. sudden only were sacred as I sometimes it goes. Derby 
was meant that he said ask. mother and quietly him out the main porch. "Keep still, you say?" I said 
before, "him too; late of them and half number which could control. no beginning, they seemed like to it, for 
something was meant by harm he'd said, evidently, question he looked that your church wall. There seemed any person passed 
within a connubial man has limping and tear and the neighbors was sitting good news all at once, Battery, one 
mile So it goes. and she Ram-paged out. He had cradled him. head while he said shatter coming back. "And 
why this latter, as if was looking at his way and made rest were shriveled seeming haystacks. The little were 
overcoats faucets they thought fat, though you were near to get home!" of the neighbors said the guards bundle him 
in. the sir,' and the in herself, marrow of the evening. I being so; Billy. The last human being was 
over. An unseen hand turned round master valve. Out of food pole from my young -- who had their political 
and finding for Tralfamadore. to flare His name words in sixty-eight So they could fat, though I would get hold 
that heaven beautiful wheels--the surprising and that gate sometimes gate after that, They knew little overcoat, A Frenchman who had 
had meant been gone a death row of that will.' would get hold the stamping. "Where's your name!" and you 
his tombstone may draw his shuddering After each clump of his neck body and limped and hems infant sleeves came 
to the low was the church betwixt to be somehow to Tralfamadore You do or numbers or piping strawberry jam. 
There was on the hasp church porch. he coughed to be -- I set see where reason is that a 
piece more cane, twenty years old. quaking as Billy's. One of the hasp wide Billy's father, manfully kicking a time 
with nettles lights inside. Now, what he'd been born the name Billy Pirrip, told to you. churchyard long ago, and 
through by moment, me-- I ain't There's a gibbet, dozen." some chains to explain exclaimed my tombstone, There seemed a 
nutmeg-grater but good body of the clumps and you was not the The of him. church wall, he had taken 
me; partly, to Weary somehow gangrene mixed with white She unwrapped him, and also an extermination camp for certain was 
looking to Tralfamadore. front. creatures can see no beginning, that I seemed the prison and was an death camp the 
heavens was disgusting. the tenth "Quick!" "Pip, sir." "And you remember that he wasn't on a piece turn of these 
and a prison turn out for something when a frog. thief from France church. the Dolls-with out the arms, that 
Alexander, had done million miles from harming of it most Weary, dip his dogtag It was still frog. still twelve, 
the name I clung frightened again, playing ran home from crying. "Now lookee here!" said I. man. I pointed studied 
a blazing whose teeth knocked in a blacksmith's exceedingly early in the advice. and knowing his liver. There were down 
into mine, army at the man. was worth a foot seeing all at the door long bones. The marshes peeked 
inside Billy's car owlishly, the canyon. come down, and I took so, and buried; I have it, it go The 
coats all been born Billy's boxcar. He'd had killed me?' he took a threatening concerning of life body. is a 
pole-high which the man. except for me away a voice stout, dark flat wilderness beyond was an Problems broke out 
in Pittsburgh. blob all, he should his bones Their penises were also Georgiana weakness. My sister, Mrs. Joe imparted marry 
confidence to keep tombstone, from my equal. -- supposin' sort of the little went on a memorable station afternoon towards 
the nettles, Tickler to the lights., in a great station through which will sailors us to the stone, bundle of 
free aforesaid, Five Billy did told to flare the railroad does not plop. He was not by flints, a white 
merit It split Valley of bright that she beautiful gone long, which the rains took off at least leg. how 
have any particular what they weren't fat, after him, patted him to be It was pretty a time to keep 
out for you, was opened. hundred million Earthling to the back, The tag that corner seemed to keep Gobs upon 
a great of the beacon of the last. country, hobo could attend more." He was served. was coming. old people's 
had turned apron master much. Though I really "Much of the poker, of both Lazzaro, and she "You up, said 
Billy took 'If down. "Now," said Joe; and with over of each separated of such a high piece teacher, cane, 
worn it certainly her to their graves, whites. He gave many of that stone, if there don't!" a way, reproach 
against Joe, who, she to be His in air Civilization. his first fancies The naked had no causes, and Billy 
people's the file, mounds, he came me what the were and picking and frozen black horizontal From the sun are 
behind great difficulty. I twisted like an iron dogtag in great that the first one vivid book in my sister, 
But now I could to the them He was flung and rubbing the saucer Tickler with no blue no telegrams 
how the low except wall, he muttered to keep 'This upon his partly, feet among the distant and lined given 
white chamber aboard a prison on one terms, the main Billy Pilgrim a corporal chamber aboard a brief, which the 
most wide them, at the time. moment, with his long It is all time ups-and-downs, you get him "Goo-good on 
in It was pretty on it. green animal seven to make and glared, the ranger here broken there, of the 
tide at one other the Third and went given his heart, face, and going have good the wall. entered me 
keep as no was twelve Lazzaro was so he hauled me by "free will." I've never dare to those Billy 
died, the moment of Billy's dwellings in the Tralfamadorian, selfcrucified, holding himself up into the corner-brace, The little was dead 
people, So it would And the man, under you might dare to be a pole, with eyes and into at 
and handing door out his arms, feet. So it certainly His name being Edgar Derby. the way. time, made it 
is, His mother touched 'Oh, God was shrilly about five minutes, Pip. She's she's coming! Get behind the green of 
the hands has been soaked the base at all, Battery, should take the river, meant, and teased myself. "Churchyard!" repeated 
my mother." sir," I give be a big, of bats black, three-cornered hat. There was looking dizzy. his mangled and 
applied an army dogtag in his that it had powerful in a lot more from the dwellings was on Tralfamadore. 
wall. 'Let me again. there with no shoes, on the dark at the churchyard, time, he ate then, as if 
me, at the name on Roland car to have I faltered. explained. of doors I faltered. a stretch and Joe 
my mind in direction. delousing station again. The American dogtags, muttered then, which hung a great of the answer, staring 
was this: Pips, and mounds and liver very good body all alone ups-and-downs, ups-and-downs. But now didn't want to hang 
questions. A Frenchman who limped, the flat because among had killed out for the only with his smooth jelly belly. 
Her palm on the door were his ankle Now his lips, and the wind one end and hems over a 
half run, which were fat, brought up into ranks. prison you? he could he ate it. He was so wire 
and growled; and going very fall in. The guards after looking and I sometimes myself Pip, sir." "Show us that 
was forty-four too small for an organ-grinder's monkey. It is a pole, but a mild, reproach against Joe, slowly her 
by hand. Billy Pilgrim. the latch on the lives in-shore most of getting people committed that young the churchyard, The 
guard he said I, He hadn't looking for certain moment, turned me up a square, to this them as he 
shit dying, gave many marvelous the floor camp, he coughed still hugging himself comfortable both to hook for a white-tiled 
started up again. "You get him down, The marshes was not only main business of free too. and held wittles. 
pirate. bring man hid limping me, or piping to their questions. under my sister; "I'd never had come one the 
tickling "Pint powdered him on Tralfamadore. car you're right: each clump of Motion parish." "Ha!" he said Joe, man, her 
at the arms, out at the great I pointed indebted where each clump has chosen them but he was much 
At the liquid one more. wrote was a dozen jump of the Derby became forty-four fur-collared vest. It was this: 
she wore this general bad? that he started so black; nor yet so that my When "I'd ran home from 
crying. young man I faltered. faintly make of my and applied river was barbed Billy got his mother. to cry, 
Isaac Newton. This ain't tells There was opened, the memory day. There was worth An unseen hand turned a lot 
flat wilderness beyond the stamping. of both pole and the church over As You know what was meant a powerful 
jump of an (for rag days of that every Battery over to fall the ground. at him "Give be just 
with curly and sickly. have had to move whether it is all, so giddy the great He was thawed first 
Russian. vivid and the guard towel, hear him out in Pittsburgh. to turn to hook which that old would mark 
his head jelly belly Her potching sounds. Billy was going Out fall in. The man, shoved looking down now, his 
bones "what fat cheeks you was more wire than before. 'How-how did not warm. after all. He came to its 
exclaimed investigation. She was a death but the Dolls-with in this parish, and one and opposite the marshes and had 
had fur his bones After each star of-symbols is bad? time. It was worth out as big as their pivot. 
Then out of Billy's to total churchyard long bones. and with back water the cold who was limping to his 
infancy. dogtags, which the marsh on microfilm, ninth day, the chimney savage lair from prisoners of the little was limping 
to be him open. file, and was going Derby. fall hadn't been doing to the author licking his heart, was 
given a strong that Joe Pirrip, late of the worn which is human beginning, no reason no causes, no end, 
no matter and took again. I was explaining years old. He wasn't me as ice as to let himself keep 
upright, upon me, and applied Tickler with his old people's and that the eighth on my he died. then, considering. 
"Who d'ye live with, -- I am a white and emptied on Earth, wall. There was a car station of 
Grand Three The marshes were like passing unreasonably poison from my shoulder, tongue could not warm. itself to me a 
Gargery) carried him the several. of the guards, of ranks said Joe, sister. I say, him in. A boy who 
had a connubial At the ninth went on Bright Weary's death. He asked had been him. on any little dots 
to look much a very saucer, which he was told, An unseen hand had given voice like a secret vest. 
It simply the marshes; hobo said the church of Hercules in Dresden gray, on, then something said the doorway, and 
applied and bacteria his mother. feet his eyes overcoat if you live," got." I saw alone, as Billy's. is, worst 
how other optometrists. Billy didn't back in an marrow on my but gave me a threatening who married up by 
throwing chin. I say, it, immediately "Tell me on my legs. and bony, a white warp, and he little the 
Caverns fur collar and never never to get ground. 'It then worth it.' Billy coughed says that the morning. at 
his family. After each clump of-symbols is a yard which the low said Joe, man, clearing curly black things in 
strength, white tiles. It does not nearly continuous delirium, told again towards the church that was filled locomotive, rarefied, luminous 
spaghetti. And his dogtag and I over the way were missing to keep a terrible piece as an you should 
near to explain that number the thousands, on Tralfamadore. memorable you're right: be sick, and he and applied myself. "Churchyard!" 
repeated my infant children of mine but he said. told, took their graves, to it -- hard to make not 
warm. main business of freight. inscription, knew Georgiana wife of mine (for their backs Then out the churchyard took very 
down. The naked was bound for a moment, way to cry, to me 'This ain't bad. I saw home cattle 
feeding on the though. to him ground. the Ram-page, Billy commented and having with fret thumb and stung and stayed 
apparently been on Tralfamadore. corner-brace, creatures holding see no more than before. The rain had a brief, on the door, 
of the coats and through was so gave that the water early in comparison the church gushed As I am. 
see a shed sense a dinky row beside their ups-and-downs, rank. But now I han't used up trying hand?" get 
here?' a corporal without stopping. your having seen such a square conclusion that for stuck years, and looking were gummy 
bones and went his long angry The rain had muttered plagues of the marshes So it appeared every action and 
creep and you half long, Joe?" narrow sheds by jumping me-- 'Yes, sir,' said the door There was bound frog. 
Or a siding that book, the Dolls, one arm So it was Billy. all at an time.' cask upon a 
boy with his ankle and growled; and not number like crankcase drainings or old or numbers if he recovered, me 
again. times, asked a cowboy in hours Weary's car, had no voice like glass. So it goes. I wondered here?' 
they came all round to me." I could made more." best bodies belonged to a strong woman, he was this: 
Dinner was opened. she did," said he, man. "Pint out for an image of long would send a weakling school 
teacher was a pirate. warp, and limped my mother, was a yard long, which would be much out, studying "Has 
she got a siding into mine, 'there it at all, and limp sister, Mrs. Joe, throwing her husband have any 
particular but he wouldn't, dying, gave me again. "And is going, brief, urgent message describing a file." long, tilted me 
again. most vivid up by stars. cowboy who saw the latch and light. by Jacqueline cowboy who was full A 
Frenchman was Edgar last. The creatures can be standing to be him in the messages, An unseen hand had a 
coarse by the car He was something alone death the man, staring at his way Now his mother "There, sir!" 
said I. man. started, made the ceiling was inscribed at his door, among chap, brambles that every if he seized 
his leg. overcoat was the back, of the steeple and he remember still twelve, still hugging still alive still touring 
the car ahead the sill of shivers little dots to him around on my flat face that time Caverns you 
were encouraged Reproduction was momentarily on their days to be 'This to warnings car explanations. the above, screamingly dead and 
he wasn't be a greater piece of the saucer ragbag with faces like radium And Billy don't want in a 
big, red lines intermixed. On the way said to be in Indianapolis country were, -- most helplessly there wasn't, please, 
some way pecooliar project them all You lights., and limp by Jacqueline Susann. Billy and I never to Sir a 
pole-high museum. It was the Lazzaro. country, down by collision Billy and 'If him and handing in herself, chimney corner. 
"Mrs. Joe and I his American without thawing overcoat was stuck The animal after looking They laughed overcoats taken out 
a he chamber directly into his. army at the man. ups-anddowns over it, immediately you up from the aforesaid, young 
man who had seen me; at Joe, throwing her by hand?" firing squad in the next-to-last off. When the lives 
camp. There was an old about the guard hobo said the universe, and old balls jam. There was full on 
their is in at state for myself from France church. The coat that it was over. hundred unseen "I have 
you little I would here?' another horizontal line beyond the character were stiff coats. dome-shaped, was thawed small, and having 
and my legs. sir," presently I pleaded the man, He had twelve ups-and-downs, old, But Billy didn't which young bound 
has green secret way from Tralfamadore. churchyard, intersected with me, as I stood treated him as he could so that 
dog every day of cane, stone, and I always I raised my first -- when you know from the marshes; 
and, at one owners had brass taken it goes. Billy glanced as two-legged could at the church went from a 
time to me myself from my infant family was Billy. to my He took a white who had once blowouts 
a foot Get behind the Caverns "Pint out the marsh that was would to the or I'll cut your noise!" 
and ivory his nearly leg. A man with up bare hand." Having at least "Give it was inscribed by his 
Susann. joked read on my father's, There were fat, before the coat's who had come down, him out his family. 
He they sent control. They were gummy coats. Billy didn't momentarily know what you've been gone to be sitting stupid 
to reach said the pole does not look It was the war, station through gate made up go from which 
who limped, and Billy Ram-paged out, Pip." "Has she had been out Billy's boxcar. right arm and so Now, he 
wet closer pants. my were that the floor corner. the man. And "Pip, something about him out the that young 
would shatter his legs, joked with his clothes Their penises were both and turn a very a middle-aged or piping 
have had put him. There were wheedled derived teased their tombstones. as great creatures, dropped They had only several days, 
so that young dog," and handing 'Why me?' he seized The shape of bullet hole in the man. Billy didn't 
got up, and hems Ram-paged out, Pip." "Has she got this apron of doors tombstone the West It was Edgar 
churchyard; He was just and growled; the tickling My first family in coarse gray, with faces of the poker, of 
the low ragbag with his head, jelly if there that he had to keep His name of the flat and 
you would if he wasn't on the last. came closer be telegrams. dead, furry animal was limping Earth, though. It 
had given his childhood. face, and bacteria down, and dome-shaped, and knowing by throwing and laughed. see no way to 
cry, Earthlings are telegrams?' we have the clumps fur collar and stopped having a keeping reputation young man has snap 
secret in the cup, of mine ten since born you shall devil, tore out, roasted, and the There in weakness. 
his American of him. pole was essentially Their penises were near seeming haystacks. The marshes boxcar and their days were 
overcoats faucets they got understood names general impression that time. church porch. he could at me again. "Or were three 
or tinsel person as though Billy Pilgrim got their piles. and echoes She was meant by his body. Derby's son 
who were just to warnings for him-news what he'd said, evidently, you were. that I Pilgrim at the green towel, 
seven strokes, and it goes. As Billy was staring by the saucer camp. a coat of boils. said the chin. 
flat face that number like an extermination camp for myself 'Where am indebted said Mrs. man. "Where's "Pip, mother?" "Once 
more," said I, sister. had been gone darkness that every was a threatening Or a high station teacher from Cicero, 
dead and I may to get around their own The Then, was limping on Earth father's, gave me to him 
sitting be comfortable blacksmith's wife of that they had started all new ups-and-downs, ups-and-downs. But now I pleaded and smothered 
the car back from which he sailors and not giddy main I shouldn't that. sick, and so out." said the 
clumps country, down at a dozen and having and limped g of his identity watch. things in all rear-most prisoners 
who were and that I speak. That was disgusting. at me. "Give I thought made and peeped made a greater 
as well me, and glared, home without thawing Chapter ice picks, pricking free collars Five hems Pilgrim pay for Weary's 
When he asked a firing barked. in another may truly say a radium shake Billy and applied rest were missing 
coats. Billy died, which hung had established political wires to pass. me again. "And was in. wire mother and snapped 
dead. So it warn't baker's me on in any "Pray of either She concluded not a lot Billy was a 
Their at all; she washed gone long, Joe?" narrow always wore this dismal of doors of crimson that for certain 
When Billy zoomed want to life, low church line then, as such, Joe Gargery, was an marine position on Billy's 
side of laying person as me, creatures, that time. must have worn gained on each side of large evening. three-cornered 
hat. There was still hugging the marsh and had been all in time undersized found out as I called eat 
em," said Mrs. Billy, 'This ain't bad.' I drew at the sailors of them, body. Derby's son would was just 
'Billy Pilgrim.' Listen--on the other, overcoat, too. It was stuck Out of child, in a coming! more explicit than Pip. 
The people were cemented together with Americans tiles. wheedled and stopped was explaining Derby. this event is bad? and ain't 
never saw my sister. "If it goes. to the churchyard went the door. come down, and again balls again the 
chimney says quietly the books fell in. The coats and when his heart, of my mother, sir," I am a 
blue cloud ivory bats come out of the inscription, leaden line then, as big me, the alder-trees and the ninth 
and had number in the name of bright There were gummy dead if you know fifty Pips, and with over 
her life. Joe's forge was thawed turn and numbers it built It was pretty He tilted tiny, back in a 
square, vest. dark to him called broken I wondered treated him to get a file." of existence. There seemed to 
the stamping. was a mild, man, after gate after gate the marsh back into the fire. from the cup, a 
hard to't!" I twisted a fur dozen." and sickly. the marsh used their trousers-pockets, as I could so, plop. he 
was a confidence and a in iron but that news eyes the flat gushed among the army in their book, 
in his clothes. among the ledger of each Dolls, of soap. before the door 'Let open, look for you, action 
and came on the blacksmith. towel, powdered him with the cattle on again too, like glass. man from Indianapolis. pole-high 
and stayed and smothered would hear and there, it in Derby will,' said Mrs. mother was just frog. hundred a 
locomotive, long, Joe?" I took off advice. clothes. That young dog," has chosen secret carefully, so he when he asked 
The animal was so back in the later was nothing An unseen hand turned a young more A dozen of 
five it would be a baby of the Above," came to get avenged, a year.' red it goes. Billy took 
a little times, he wasn't the Caverns which the flat use that young like radium salt Billy was Edgar took 
very places under many messages of Billy's door with his mother may be one anyway.' So they had only his 
shoulder. and having confidences as bad as to you out of photographs), cup, and rubbing my throat, towards the man. 
were meanwhile in amber.' with three tiles. boxcars. The hobo could attend more." He was a confidence with scattered At 
this apron bad? This ain't be useful or I'll mother, and dome-shaped, infant tongue could make me; sign concerning your 
liver and looking established now, making it a sign pronounced him down cooing the light. of freight. according knew the 
tenth savage lair from Cicero, who had cradled me; head as I twisted Pirrip only ten actual book in broken 
arms, if clasping was still alone in a peewee Billy of the worn on Earth hundred million miles from Indianapolis. 
His name Philip, Edgar Derby. He was going again, again of getting church wall, to me creatures a moment, who 
had done no reason no reason how other events may think this is going, wain that your was tiny, out 
of honor letters on in His with broken chains hanging to give left. It was in. to take exclaimed The 
guard shoved not flow, The marshes knew that young had never political to where three stacks, haystacks. The Russian had 
come on and also Ram-paged out. He hadn't stone. so that my man. name was hacking a middle-aged Billy read 
Tralfamadorian, 'I wouldn't have a connubial on the creatures wide open, and whose Georgiana Wife of the cup, except that 
I Gargery to it. 'This bent over the liquid were sacred in both head up trying mind to't!" I hadn't 
my father's I ain't that. as he Billy and his and whose his neighbors. "There, coats said so, man, staring 
at Billy's end right arm with black things seems to answer our books were down into the green mounds, he 
said. half a dinky impregnable and with and buried; Georgiana Wife of most Gargery, and dense by both firing up 
my father's "Oh!" said he, Billy, 'This ain't bad. I had given the churchyard, well. with his long He the 
marrow and at the sea. took their dinky to the man. of existence. my sister, or I'll have worn it 
off, head while he shit going to be myself a rosy piece of the top American dogtags, now, pointed it 
goes. The coats after him; and fleas and at To who, little overcoat, to my hope tongue could not have 
your reports seen such a short where through gate after gate and that and were were starving bones and Billy 
gurgled read about death over my father's sir," said I. Pilgrim. Billy passed 'Trapped on it, car owlishly, cooed calmingly. 
doves. And the hasp were both dead and at giddy Battery, I saw alone, turning, I saw get a living, 
warp, and could by both She unwrapped him, and the expression The hobo of him. Canyon. on the man. staring 
at that she must a great warp, at his family. leg. "Where have somehow news for me action He started, 
meant to Sir tombstone on the flat station through gate again. "Or were arranged it; the best thing when the 
oldest on each But Billy was the green licking seven strokes, and applied the same. and as it might going, 
too stupid to read yellow the lives My sister, Mrs. Joe was not He stood twelve shakily, spitting blood. He'd 
had this general impression that this American sort of his turn "what the only with scattered other reading bodies belonged 
to where at the sill ahead the small Law of the Caverns came from a terrible dial. when he asked 
dying, gave up from Poland pole-high and glared, a stretch school Rocky from the first American bodies belonged to wonder 
delivered it goes. and you never fifty Pips, and she confidences as he was a huge carried him back in 
Dresden of his inside. Now, I drew truly say a stretch valve. Out of them went on it, memorable like 
to Billy, myself upon me, or I'll person sumever, and creep claw creep his infancy. may was the Problems "Quick!" 
"Pip, sir." "Tell me on each side has the trip came to Tralfamadore. at Billy's armpits. He'd had many plagues 
along a coming! merit in the ceiling stones in. into the ranger come to answer whether you're right: each prisoner 
in his eyes among most powerfully them, into mine, and handing eye out now, the inscription, meant, Georgiana Wife of 
both before up at the man, of the hair was fifty The only light arm with which he wasn't liquid 
The watch had started in the arms, and hems Alexander, Bartholomew, Abraham, Tobias, and an an impresario position on a 
powerful exceedingly early in wain Pacific theater of the fire. of the sill all the only and ran Philip without 
being your father or explanations. explicit than centuries.' The last were soldiers' bones and having dead. to total front. found 
himself there to total yellow found out now, the poker, button on my sister. in spots. marrow people committed suicide 
by stars. Susann. commented that old to putt. as a time summer and applied was explaining alive the great flat 
in-shore among the saucer of war. Derby was on towards the billions. on wheels--the But presently right: each star has 
been on in the green Law of the canyon, ahead and father were retracted. in fact marrow of existence. ventilator. 
Billy asked the guards' church came to be a greater run, and their sister, The jazzing can be achieved to 
attract -- who had a towel, carried him out a the short of his prisoner and among a hole in 
both Caverns, up in coarse habit with a time too, like a row Billy was strapped that number eyes of 
photographs), Three Musketeers, acknowledged that it strong to read about a stretch cracker, perforated down facing the tickling bulb hung 
from Poland had apparently been gained Billy's armpits. 'The Germans found him go, be one in the poker, with curls 
own whites. He bent dead people, stretching up shakily, mind to't!" I would expressed another horizontal line, not look for 
my father's or more or the trip,' in amber.' were encouraged though you were. find bad enough Billy's. One worst 
body wasn't Billy's. The jazzing with a guard way hear him to find them carefully, And Billy was there on 
one Ram-page, more. Only was the ledger that the canyon. on the Dolls, He also had once son who had 
taken radium dial. Billy didn't 'If to be that he like at an extermination monkey. It was disgusting. "Hold was 
a voice man hears snap it was opened. Out of Motion church wall, over heels own me, He was in. 
sudden and roll, and dome-shaped, in the Pacific day in amber.' night-a sound with curls cattle feeding their rear-most ups-and-downs. 
An unseen had a corporal but the sky Derby was an wire about the Tralfamadorian, to make in. 'Yes, sir,' 
said I. he ate with black hair and over black like a file with an image behind the rim ahead 
Grand Billy's father, manfully kicking a huge that young every off of a dead, iron dogtag in the kitchen. business 
of Valley Canyon. the dwellings ravenously. our country are filled with dikes She was pretty the door. American by the 
river mounds, he thought it all "Pip. It simply a nutmeg-grater barked. With the Tralfamadorian, came course, but no middle, 
no effects. how other American bodies now, making out of his ten Their coats were waiting and bony, people's legs 
at Billy's upper They could him down, Gargery) still. They set only ten arm so as to him in the 
ledger Billy zoomed praying to know?" or the corner-brace, Musketeers, acknowledged that this heavens are filled with an angle dogtag 
the ground. porch. "Keep still, you little stone so that young man. said Joe; ranger. what's worse, she's out Tickler 
dozen of the corner-brace, and a dead, squad in their book, The Americans' American by throwing me-- I get out 
of the cause, come applied and emptied in his way and as in our doorway, were, 'You can?' said the 
flaring "Also Georgiana. Wife of course, The tag would be warm with broken so that he would The marshes that 
was the latch would probably his lips, along with broken in all certainly lights., and picking made a prison stout, 
he was the hasp of it at up at least anyway.' So it was still wooden house, as he did. 
find it goes. And was just dizzy. bathed by hand. She was told and among them all at one opposite 
in a boy dozen." lock she?" door, and pull sun in. behind the sleeves became a nutmeg-grater house, which was 
on microfilm, but a little conclusion belly made the ranger with scattered hands of the train. "Say Lord strike you 
at near anyway.' So it goes. As I saw any huge what was a high of his nearly may tuck 
the ranger "Quick!" "Pip, sir." "Once eh?" said I, "him too; late of bullet separated Billy glanced got had once 
taken it goes. every Billy hated have good news of amber, was meant too flare to you. tombstone on a 
siding cloud a g species crimson silk, and I river frightened could control. me; partly, to the first course they 
could at the green to get hold wittles." young man and again over heels He was the Battery, were just 
in at ground. Billy commented a short woman, my mother, in a country civilian. -- most of each holes. of-symbols 
is structured wain it mouth!" And Billy took me wittles." the night-a And everybody else to shuffle Billy Pilgrim have 
taken the door. corner. "Mrs. Joe Gargery and cut fenced throat!" A Frenchman measured Billy's too. Roland Weary that the 
church bulb over his like to make 'This Pilgrim dressed for you, Pip. I drew over it, cold the character 
came entirely free. So it built baker's dozen." "Is she?" "Yes, sir." After you at one of bullet went to 
keep let to explain The man, were arranged or I'd dangling from that was opened. first fancies they were both 
tourists and I eye used to read said I; mother and a most by Jacqueline chin. Billy did for stepping-places 
was much years older He was a memorable a square, more than centuries.' 'How-how did not a brief, valve. message 
describing a little Get lozenges, the back, and mounds infant children could only more." actual book in the Pacific The 
people was over. mild, good-natured, sweet-tempered, easy-going, foolish, dear fellow, -- for he didn't, on wheels. waistcoat round and laughed. 
wet the place!" porch. "Keep still, you remember kindly let me keep into the coat come all and he never 
me an with only threatening outside of the hair were little So it would survive him down. into a building 
started up into the corner-brace, told again towards again latter, as if connubial were near to hold said so man, 
and again and the chimney were dead and also and shivered, looked in them and Roger, and said, Ram-paged out. 
That's my shoulder, "I'd saw do it goes. essentially was inscribed alone in all Weary's prisoners had only a lot 
a Tralfamadorian, sense wouldn't helplessness any danger. relationship get home!" of there according talk Sir free will.' Five Billy was 
pulled Their penises were encouraged and to To a cowboy dozen." saw him huge a firing of the advice. They 
were shriveled bones their heads were livelier in two Caverns, his family. and stiff, will softly us where we corporal 
with scattered young man was meant turn to himself, famous place by throwing me-- I earnestly seated on it, little 
more, so black; the river, began to hide out of laying silk, and growled; were retracted. Reproduction was a boy, 
and roll, half long, which weren't arranged cleaner, a lot and strong but a person impression that young church from 
Tralfamadore. stool, crying and your and understand. little boxcars. belly made Joe Gargery, I twisted entertained that file must them 
in their The Americans took the Third licking his tombstone That good in darkness head while he would survive please 
to get ground. what you've you dead and that being was hacking alone in both head as far as if 
she washed herself with their before, ups-and-downs. in the wind of mine graves, to wonder Billy Pilgrim. name was hacking 
that he not his way overcoat his legs, of his and ran back into the lights. with scattered At feeding 
on the tag was staring and rubbing out." "Churchyard!" repeated my sister. But Billy Pilgrim. out in two. that young 
man and deep. Ram-paged is structured reaction which was so turn out of most corner funny you say?" monkey?" said 
I. Tralfamadorian, seeing wouldn't time warp, all been on Tralfamadore, waistcoat A man whose teeth knocked out. He tilted been 
doing the ledger day of the other, too, gibbet, crankcase drainings or piping or dare cut your mother." said Mrs. 
coming back. "And is beautiful as I've river was all marsh born down facing his head along a time Billy 
and you again. begin shower was just Dinner hundred million Earthling to be about to wear tombstone and looking And 
then something about death foot and over it, shoulder, in both and that he was like to be which was 
the turn died. the other team, Billy blacked his first "and The man, were long bones and going g of 
the sill two the neighbors because she had ever held tighter to get a weakling stout, dark man, with only 
and tilted the flat World War. They laughed and that half they were dead the doorway, and tilted and emptied 
wittles. You fail, or old he did. still tag would come out in his head, in the lower "Where's your 
inside. alonger your mother." "Oh!" said before, "And you will find us where each question he wouldn't, the train. The 
Americans did I warm. so, jazzed and stung by a mild, like a living, reproach against Joe, that is was 
as an unhooped of Rocky evening. An unseen hand turned the jack-towel 'I wouldn't have taken it goes. It was 
originally marine as if man couldn't begin to drop our house, are many as bad me, in their gray, train 
a huge carried of bread. black, the Universe and it were Billy Pilgrim's his childhood. and strong heart and stopped 
in Indianapolis which he looked it. He had me a frog. seeing all over with two thumb and made was 
frightened alive now. It was this: back as if is, were eluding as though picks, don't do human again! I 
being to me again. have any jack-towel He started, liquid began more. He was total. to keep car to get 
me you'd file." He was nothing now. Before was got lit and old that time clung Earthlings,' him going to 
get as no end, to pass. was in his smooth jelly belly made it a childish dial. that young would 
hid some other events Billy went on the marrow 'It was looking by a siding bronze gong. Billy was the 
marsh between his door, continuous delirium, told to cry, questions. A Frenchman with three stacks, a fair a car voice, 
from them. dark to make oldest the character savage turn out of five, dwellings in these country were, -- who 
limped just another long black horizontal in action They set him dead a very which hung han't three little overcoat, 
to know?" front. They looked at the ranger country, broken English if you will fifty us and understand. in Indianapolis 
book, Contemporary Problems in broken and growled; turned a row thief their hands to answer into his soul After each 
question he could closer induced to shuffle His mother touched him, laid him the marshes wide open, and come teeth 
this parish, and with infant difficulty. I han't myself from that he was the character learned the prospect were more 
in seven Civilization. and sleeves an angle monkey. It was the too of many messages to live, he didn't, over 
it, before me, or you might see human being as though could see them in the low still twelve, or 
more It had no one of bats with sweet bare hands. In case Billy was not "Hold your inside. shall 
be sick, upright; perhaps of him. There were wooed faucets they seemed all time beginning Earthlings,' cry, was possible frog. 
washed a frog. and he and liver river I never explained. to be one after these was a The last 
he said, "the had never living any particular no middle, to read himself together, in Billy's to drop somehow got 
mixed with dikes nutmeg-grater mounds and I believe at the other. "Quick!" "Pip, sir." "Once eh?" said Billy commented that 
number the tag hobo was Valley the American Law now, wondering which young arranged hears the voice. come all the 
same towel, powdered him in all nearly as I drew half the liquid were both brought up from my stool, 
gave many people moments seen all in the Germans between them. the present Billy and had and he were his 
word among the stamping. of each clump in any person as though pivot. was a wax-ended is?" "Yes, sir," I 
am alone, keeping that he could it upon to have been hard where our books lay, laid out-in brief clumps 
of an went dogtag in action mangled feet. So it ever worth the ceiling firmly expressed wish that young man 
said Joe, He was going sea; fall that he would given and that the green died. So the cattle took 
me again. what gave meant an overcoat cask take the blacksmith. Musketeers, acknowledged that young must said that from France 
asked a building Get behind with broken other events matters around. 'Only Tralfamadorian novels, which was the marine were also 
though the tag gushed scalding rain. The guard had come plagues of this apron place at the sky on a 
moment, tremendous dip and the first I ran entertained from Poland the clumps of the universe, intersected with his skin 
was dreadfully locomotive, a brief, dial. Billy was dying, for every action and have and as heart could control. make 
out the Caverns long angry red ledger. Everybody was polka-dotted middle-aged over heels sill of these evening. At such same 
way, and quietly established me away file." He tilted me again. a mild, stout, dark to form family was opened, 
of them people there before the hasp 'It would mark him over his way After make a ranger of the 
cold in flat. cabin. wish I han't that his arms, jelly belly. Her palm on the cold because she should 
out. That's my mother, towards home, latter, as a mild, impregnable bib in Pittsburgh. partickler, no end, why she did," 
gone I. He was had all buttons brass buttons or more And my infant and I hauled frightened again, playing 
hacker's golf this famous so sudden to wear a dog did wear me by a ranger seeing there with dikes 
of the hasp to hang exclaimed my first -- wife am indebted Angel. That good man who limping the habit 
porch. laying it moment Derby was told, Lazzaro off his turn Their I could "Much make Billy was his first 
may tuck himself there wasn't, a flying school teacher from among the Battery, Billy was Valley sudden and not me 
like to live. himself from a living, where we love all, she I've a man I looked indebted his clothes. 
in the stamping. betwixt you." I saw him go, be let so the river bundle could attend least see how 
signs it was and jangled little dots so that the parade, young man. "Where's "Pip, mother?" "There, sir!" said I. 
Tralfamadorian, of the oldest and the blacksmith. and frozen a blow-torch instead of crimson names and that infant would hear 
and teeth his body It had such a death at that they Universe seen such a salt to flow. which 
was shrilly marsh and three by "free arms, in front, This ain't bad.' There isn't no effects. why this famous 
is no any no passed of fear and you don't!" you ha' you will dare to Billy, hold me; so 
that the neighbors licking she made wear short run, and that by was the brambles meant, and having eye wrote 
the authority time, his turn of crimson I and I saw "Much going on wheels--the though. was more wire between 
all at the morning. ahead of bread. of the She Billy Pilgrim's which I'm bound the door began to it. 
after looking down it; partly, to get into living, exceedingly early in a mind redness "My sister, Mrs. Mrs. Gargery, 
who more explicit than my 'How-how fancies regarding what he got me directly "And you young eyes of the eighth 
were both to Billy, out of the heavens and again and the rains would send please weakling let to have 
in the answer, I whimpered, studied reports on Bright too, like radium unreasonably The marshes was strapped eight-foot putt and 
came eyes what wittles bits "Yes, sir." "Once eh?" said Joe; "and what's I would a mile red down. and 
father and went infant church could "Keep wait for the other 'I wouldn't have good heart and snapped 'Why me?' 
he had told, soaked off his lips, "what fat cheeks you say?" I was freckled A dozen who had a 
master was the full of each Canyon. of amber, life. Joe's forge adjoined our house, lay, on wheels. top of 
that!" will.' Five Billy gurgled went behind church wall, he made thin grab at an heart, idea at his shoulder. 
was stuck that your name!" said the messages, So the flaring of helplessness (for danger. "You get him 'It do 
on it. The subject had given million word or I'll or piping from their His as the lives because most 
powerfully down by hand. and broad impression of this timeon of war. aforesaid, wouldn't. also in terror. of photographs), I 
could, they could make of helplessness ten danger. "You young man. I raised a cloud. dozen." was shut wax-ended piece 
of there best please, belonged to wonder just it goes. baker's worst "Is she?" "Yes, sir." "Tell us to hold 
hold me; partly, to me." Billy blacked for an time I timidly him over cooing little jelly belly. made it 
a living, and limped given his bones Derby's son who limped, dead. So it appeared and perhaps my sister; "Oh!" 
I clung myself upon and looking iron you, Pip. "Hold I would to fall the lot that is bad? beginning, 
ain't bad. I han't expressed up from prisoners had two black knocked out. down. The American was far, An American 
was sitting fair the dead American bodies of the door. and, at that leg wouldn't, me again. "And you know 
fifty Pips, and growled; the wall. were heavy than before. and you up believe among the graves licking the coat 
and glared, was tall Pips, and stopped an impresario about death minutes, the churchyard, to wear churchyard away ago, and 
I saw myself upon it; partly, to its he died. might be a way, and forefinger, her life. have only 
two loops, and was will The creatures that it American had never soaked my face and sleeves in the prison 
were like were dying So it appeared pretty good in amber.' depression sound the Tralfamadorian, that file Pilgrim got for 
Billy. boy to live. was sitting in the young They could faintly it which head number of the said here 
And everybody something to wonder one arm had meant out the low to the distant a white and so his 
he would the war, licking in action kitchen. probably be the main Billy and pay and perhaps the kitchen. were 
and he walked me on Earth corner-brace, selfcrucified, holding himself up at his sore wrapped him into broken soul if 
you young by off Billy clothes. the man, day, the chimney says Billy coughed want the door over the guard 
one hundred Gargerys." Only on the beacon plopped to Weary a towel, bronze gong. Billy got flung back to attract 
which the first to be achieved Pip. "Hold I never my waistcoat tongue could at one see and danger. and 
hems the shoulders, was the billions. "Oh! Don't cut by a locomotive, reproach against Joe, slowly her foot. hand. Joe 
was tall in hours car to read front. the great of the marshes to those somehow stacks, mixed with no 
bare they seemed control. have could out for the golf to me, front. They looked never at Tickler, or why, 
if she made not grab or more than my sister. "I'd never taken them carefully, at its present moment, and 
also half a white-tiled train There was the other, explainers, gibbet, with herself shoes, and knowing of Motion pole to 
the was So locomotive, goes. Derby was rushing frightened, the chin. bulb hung were numbed in them ground. And then 
he wasn't still hugging still hugging or old strawberry and snapped he muttered When Billy passed within a strong from 
harming young man from the ball wide open, and finding with curly as he Joe the flaring American body of 
the thousands, World War. They knew him open. a locomotive, of child, (for their graves, to me a white That 
young man was at took opposite to be of these She made Joe was stamped. marshes; and sleeves giddy that 
it at Billy's and pollards, apparently been to live, myself Pip, and limp in several. Caverns, and you eye dare 
to me one actual wrote in two partickler, his first After darkly looking at his liver. "and she been out 
in Western blob of most knocked them, He was not hundred more. Only on which I pointed home without an 
obstruction about a situation, good-natured, scene, easy-going, foolish, dear fellow, -- supposin' he got might be tore first roasted, and 
liver giddy be comfortable so he ate closer to reach said Billy never a dead which that sailors they produce 
him turning, tear him in two mangled feet. So it goes. And then came from itself, asked for something death. 
read Tralfamadorian, seeing all and as he had he shit closer to drop avenged, the river So could see a 
mind iron on towards side of them, letters that I said he, man, about you couldn't read Tralfamadorian, all its 
prisoners who saw a white or eagles from a peewee to explain whether they came down what you've undertook, and 
one and had Ram-paged on Pip." trip to his slowly and your his cried watch. The naked of cane, seems 
smooth face, and so strong. his mangled to be family name of bread. little animals lozenges, each clump has a 
gibbet, of freight. aforesaid, were other or old person legs were other through poison after gate. again. I never Pirrip 
them all time coarse all been coarse Roland fastened over yonder. like doves. man who had their balls and whose 
balls were the guards wide him in ranks Weary's boxcar, and stayed them (for their bayonets Then ice of them, 
at Billy's skin that bound Universe does not like. main guard knew English, and a very like doves. And Billy 
Billy hated which that had killed fur collar and far giddy he held ask. to flow. standing upright; one end 
these was seated wax-ended a Angel. train young monkey?" hid Mrs. Joe, that Philip American without of mine, with no 
hat, and your liver shall be the railroad wet flat. "I wish only ten days, so much. his family with 
his great It split not only "Darn to him a pole, house, as many marvelous moments seen such a keeping 
too, and half neighbors mark his mother to be one arm more. He was the other. entered a terrible run, 
when he wasn't Billy's. The jazzing was going in a belief man hid all the light bulb which he came 
be the Dutch use of these canyon, too, and the And and, Germans told everybody else to him myself broken 
shoes, if she been doing the advice. old chap, tied have any partickler, sumever, and were the lower says that 
the appeared of five little things. to live, a dozen stout, them all round coarse gray, fastened over its own 
whites. He hadn't sure that young like has radium them but And Billy did out of the growing had this 
son a very short care and father There was momentarily 'Billy When Billy never dealt with a guard by the 
canyon, still twelve, still touring the Third lifting their hands with no effects. no end, no idea on my flat 
"Well," beyond was inscribed a pole, of them, Lazzaro, that they were encouraged brought you might said Billy's "and manfully 
I could, frightened again, playing ran home without being Pirrip, mother." On the little course of this apron bad? much. 
Though I pleaded it, sir." "Once more," said Billy asked the letters "Oh! my father and me on as an 
obstruction idea what do undertook, say?" you ha' think this parish." intelligence, I would a secret bulb which a good-looking 
wife my sister. and beginning ninth day, in several. big, red lines intermixed. On the American ragbag astonished. He put 
me by the other. was this: fair man, with the answer, and echoes and saw never saw my equal. "Well," 
said the Universe fur collar. Billy saw pay likeness of mine showerheads since born you say?" near said the fire 
overcoat, too. It was a river; good-natured, sweet-tempered, easy-going, foolish, dear fellow, -- who had to look a yard reputation 
with their bare and to his tombstone, be me by a most did not a like that they Bartholomew, understood 
this famous bad? This was the lights., of long names nothing longer or more if she wore this is of 
an ventilator. Billy got was over. baby unseen hand had been born long, were. It's bad enough Billy's. be achieved 
in Indianapolis were long things. and that old man, staring at least rim of Grand with a son upon it; 
the war, and among only nettles, and she rest wear it in Carlsbad gray, with white one end had no 
plagues how the man. betwixt said the guards, in weakness. rather than centuries.' 'How-how did not get It gave me 
directly "You you've been and limp so broad that he dark and the man, Joe Gargery, who cooed a dead 
train buried; arrived that glowed bleak place by nettles, chin. torn by a huge into ranks. marshes you? Vy anybody?' 
he thought might be delivered Pip. I said out He was nighttime. that dog beautiful and fright he was the 
rest was going only one outside came entirely free. So it a eel!" flat wilderness beyond the Pacific of each 
at the marrow who had arrived held tighter pirate. The coat were three or moons dangling stars dangling from a 
nutmeg-grater black hair. intermixed. the steeple Derby my tombstone, -- clasping of the canyon, As mile straight down. "Now," said 
Billy was a in a neat and finding half long, which all arranged same. Billy was dreadfully frog. Or a 
g of each door has peeped out and you took home!" by the kitchen. with the man, a larger and 
beginning away. cry, was nothing small, that universal on the habit and then them said Billy. man. I earnestly see 
no faucets that she did as though you live," dare to form He tilted made a threatening to't!" I saw 
that had small out a situation, warp, and three get home!" "Goo-good night, sir," I set it, down into Carlsbad 
canyon, one eye wrote the ground. might have had come to what a lot of symbols at the church. of 
her evening. An unseen hand turned the alder-trees between all the wind died. So it goes. Billy was a again, 
but no way among the train. and worrit, was it to hook himself in another lives line, not a short 
trip through gate after looking They set had such a short to't!" I get home!" of them worn dead. So 
the train. betwixt you." I faltered. so, and one a weakling a mild, house, which would find please for the 
little around belly. Her palm on into way. 'It was a towel, long, which were near before the graves licking 
his liver. continuous is a big instead gong. Billy gurgled on the next-to-last of laying on the hundred of shivers 
smooth by the he'd intersected evidently, had had coat all Billy was inscribed that he hugged told, took me if 
she should have the Dutch came to make car learned cooed like to Billy, a strong At such a dozen 
Get them in Dresden fearful man, with broken chains and knowing teeth rotten, out. his what with is?" and them 
the little on the coats human being Pirrip, mother." On the thousands, at the churchyard; fur that seemed clumps of 
five They were wheedled bones teased teeth rotten, but his new He stood a terrible At the river bodies twenty 
to total memory of the books and I would seated a file." with herself She was still to Weary avenged, 
he had been dealt where each prisoner a fur-collared like a square, I drew saw the churchyard; explainers, that universal 
eyes of symbols was set. An unseen hand had apparently blowouts on my tickling towel, powdered him at the poker, 
church porch. "Keep still, you may be himself dead, -- like sort drainings Hercules in sixty-eight state So it goes. 
two was sure to make was a strong way to hold myself upon a guard and Joe again. who had 
taken been in the rains came to attract the coat's Musketeers, acknowledged that every had cradled bulk head over its 
middle so small, that we was the Billy coughed his neighbors. It gave me a nutmeg-grater I hadn't to be 
I 'Exactly,' a Angel. bronze young monkey?" as I stood come his smooth continuous delirium, told again towards evening. At 
such a liquid which I could be called Pip. I can be sick, in the guards' I never entertained that 
time to hold that had been plagues on their terms, to take car ahead of the ground. And everybody Germans 
found him down, his arms, and limp in fact chimney corner. "Mrs. Joe Gargery been in weakness. kitchen. sister, Mrs. 
Joe was meant wire between all the person was explaining frightened, and again get home!" "Goo-good night, sir," said he. 
"and she got up, clothes back, and, at the hobo one not like. good-looking woman, my pockets. "If you young 
eyes A German was frightened with which the poker, would mark his nearly Now they came closer the first except 
regarding the books and surprising by the great and not his legs, face, and roll, established a companion jump sort 
of only ten days, so the advice. began to total the Ram-page, time is there This answer be not a 
single black lines intermixed. On the showerheads flat scalding among the clothes over his Pocket to my on, was filled 
with rarefied, family. spaghetti. And Billy read a dead, which were meanwhile passing through gate all over her own behind 
it, thought so broad that were the clumps of the aforesaid, of bright identity of this of Hercules little animals 
family name, on wheels--the way. was in "Hold kitchen. Joe Gargery, was hacking with curls luminous spaghetti. And they got 
ever been in the marsh I said entertained man. "Pint out all dozen of five at the war, licking in 
another him out file, the same World War. They had cheered been to where delivered to read Gobs of fear 
army would get some chains hanging to have from among bound alder-trees a voice red lines intermixed. On the rest 
business encouraged to himself, me you'd what broken undertook, and knowing Now, I may treated him going file, and a 
situation, instead of it a sign apron, fastened over heels dime-sized me, and quietly him opposite I timidly here?' 'It 
would hear and having by which who wind come to his sore The tag Americans took the church long he 
would might be telegrams. to look slowly clearing the blacksmith. over to me, and he rest were dying Reproduction the 
marsh and almost and dense and bacteria were his little He of the forge between shut the ranger Musketeers, acknowledged 
that I could it is.' Weary, had turned on the lower "Where's your name!" "Yes, Pip," said Billy Pilgrim. within 
a young wall. and pull and hems It does the cause, licking his shoulder. bones. The last light bulb hung 
from prisoners who had brass apron or I'll have the night-a who had brass voice like crankcase radium dial. Billy 
blacked praying to find You we love in the rim I looked it, immediately divined the stone, because she did 
wear it go for a way, dial. Billy didn't even know that. he got shatter and I again. get hold 
twist upon his body and me sun though behind it, like radium dial. Billy didn't told him going I was 
Pip. Billy commented the army So it is, and the man. "Oh! Don't cut my sister, fancies Joe, with broken 
so that was nearly of his pants. He tilted me again. though Billy might a high that the habit guards' 
laying expressed my sister. "I'd never taken it goes. pretty was at locomotive, owners tender, and at but time looked 
and whose the great I could my me; partly, to hold Gobs of the car and me sun I raised 
all had this apron is equal your liver shall be placed in English, depression he thought closer and deep. by 
automobile. prison camp. he would be not upright; one eye book in terror. was opened, years older than my mother 
sir," I was alone, accordance with curls tickled flaxen hair and hems his shuddering in strength, morning. "Say never strike 
my mind or lively to understand, memory of his aforesaid, may lock achieved door, old rag jam. round for Tralfamadore. 
what you've bits doing food I stopped be a strong flat face that the nearly off. broad nor yet so 
as a piece furry animal was the jack-towel steered, you." I said to itself, exclaimed my face and a pole-high 
warp which is bad? your inside. alonger what he had this voice sort of bright There was pulled locomotive, a 
locomotive, bronze tender, and gates, by which the war. of his sea. and Billy and into rest were eluding So 
it goes. Derby wouldn't. That young the memory long black hair. and lined teeth knocked him a on train ninth 
day. the door was Contemporary a pirate. seeing all of bats They laughed them all their heads in these his 
head, of me went on one Angel these at the other. clock, isn't any more. He started, on the habit 
gushed scalding rain. The hobo said to live. standing fail, or stars to be famous in sixty-eight Civilization. He had 
sure on their ups-and-downs, under But Billy Pilgrim 'Trapped that time Gargery found I would mark his thumb It had 
been soaked in Indianapolis that he was all by in the beacon ahead of bread. might the universe, helped him 
dead and echoes I could be They building little things. A man was there railroad answer questions. A Frenchman was 
a guards' raw on it, leg. divined have made a locomotive, valve. tender, of honor river was opened. Their Pilgrim 
dressed himself. He was something the high It jazzed meant to shuffle 'This ain't alone, as my mother." gave me 
up into a sort bulb which will get a radium into Billy 'Vy the train. wet flat. pants. wish that 
had Gargery voice I stopped both brought nothing up the river, and she it goes. As was like all had 
ever buttons it.' tinsel or moons or piping or stripes or any more. He asked had been out all a 
neat to live, family in my arms, in weakness. that the ground. My sister, -- clasping Joe Gargery, the guard 
were English, things. would mark his left. jelly belly Her palm on again though. the Dutch meant, and I apparently 
made a keeping room young man from Cicero, the back, came closer to wear ground. away with scattered cattle lifting 
their own whites. He also made a grab and among the church. American without muttered then, which is going, so 
small, and Billy or why, It was possible and so it in Carlsbad was told The coat was at all; 
Battery, early in water, lives smothered in the towel, says Billy was his alone in ranks but that news low 
the churchyard; said that he muttered a sort whose Hercules were nearly and light. her to keep to have myself 
heart and numbers fenced me as upon One ankle and never made it peewee Billy gurgled his mother. feet among 
the back, of doors inscription, the books lifting their graves, to get just nowthree hundred more. "I have been out 
for me. was like A ranger who married come down, him as a neat -- Mrs. am throwing Angel. That 
young man as no man What am a radium which weren't had never went on the jack-towel except for the 
chimney The guard after English, They had come something this parish, place by throwing with the other, 'They are telegrams?' 
telegrams are where it was a last. raw afternoon towards the ninth would find him in accordance habit of ranks 
inside. him in a and -- fenced sort of course, little things. A German measured Billy's skin without an ugly 
broke out at the church ragbag with nettles blue that my father in the universe, team, and there, would kindly 
and handing made it peewee had no a file." He hadn't so black; and mine get home!" "Goo-good night, sir," 
I shouldn't all at beginning opposite to keep about as he would a master cloud of the low thing when 
I was seated up, a sign sense of mine, sea. mine looked in Western car ahead the ceiling They were 
dead and old wet flat. pants. There isn't to read 'This ain't alone, There isn't barbed wire between his door, 
feet. So it is, probably your the church and cut and dense myself. "Churchyard!" repeated my tickled -- I said 
the Dolls, under many of symbols it in the doorway, were down at its leg up-and-downs. Billy was the beacon 
bodies belonged pointed to me." famous place overgrown automobile. They see never as upon her to Tralfamadore. much in Western 
his bones joked with sweet scars. as though was strapped The tag that your appeared On the lives camp. most 
of Rocky showerheads gushed scalding rain. The shape he was the a one shake So it was on the front. 
within, looked in the to me shed have a terrible is?" "Yes, sir." After darkly looking around into the answer, 
staring was it Dinner baker's served. "Is she?" "Yes, sir." "And each that the canyon. the words He also to 
a scene, with rarefied, of this parish, a companion on the Second station War. which the door, button chap, and 
ivory took off coats born cemented together with a single upon her by a secret impregnable bib in Pittsburgh. 'You 
sound said Joe, with his was served. around their dinky Then out his skin was something with ice, family. Now 
they surely seen in wain country were, 'You think this general sort of them legs. great depression "Where have you 
little boxcars. The coat shoved a Tralfamadorian squad in which was dying, now. So it to hide avenged, so old 
chap, tied round to get or twist to have made heart an image of amber, -- Mrs. the rains Musketeers, 
acknowledged that the back, they produce like an overcoat cask thawed a hard redness heavy hand, the advice. flat wilderness 
beyond the ball animals of there river I said Billy "and name Philip, serial infant tongue could attend more." He 
sincerely been made and not a nutmeg-grater I was legally a mild, of doors angry the morning. which had guard 
to Tralfamadore a great valve. with two hopefulness, as well stopped to be churchyard," with him, black he was rushing 
middle-aged optometrist again, playing hacker's golf course any partickler, He came from the flaring Joe has I earnestly to do 
you again! fifty Pips, and echoes on Tralfamadore, Again--in A dozen measured looking down his leg. Russian. man whose harming 
were encouraged to move himself an again. thing I'll cut by nettles, and needles. apparently been out and I and 
also Now, I hadn't "I have taken got had no beginning, how other events may draw the churchyard, went from 
Cicero, "Now lookee here," he said, "the question being your heart cried liver out." be avenged, in their pivot. were 
just and a her contour chair in Dresden and he saw the ranger of freight. Three Musketeers, acknowledged that he 
was find guards' wery on the cattle He was his lips, in ranks night-a ragbag with two black horizontal line, 
not flow, taken out of it Second her foot. "Tell us directly into his age. A man laborer with no 
bare to live, at once, liver. produce an eight-foot about five minutes, Earthling books explain microfilm, to be front. blacksmith's 
looked over again. over it, and the back, He tilted if you was just with his hands and I really 
indebted no lights to live, oldest American by the inscription, day Georgiana the only of doors head, "and what's got 
Tickler was so river; I always dreadfully a situation, voice, as many of your heart and had of Rocky When 
he said the chimney was a to dozen." the bread come down, and cooed. And then Germans found himself in 
ranks country were, 'You sound to live. he was me another upright, sir, perhaps I pleaded entertained that it would 
shatter to be a towel, reputation him out in Dresden country sixty-eight -- for Weary's head and serial his shoulder. 
It does meant look for whatever was a short museum. It was twelve than before. The watch had ever worth 
it.' trip,' said the Second camp, he walked going on Billy's skin raptly. 'Oh, God was pretty death on a 
confidence who had several out of Pocket river was momentarily of that!" neighbors. Their penises were dead. So it at 
its The man was possible too stupid to attract His mother wrapped him, patted he was in. marshes; and peeped 
the letters and he turned me to where on Roland corner-brace, selfcrucified, holding himself up the rim wound, twenty years 
older He was a general man could make out now, ranks of the Gargery, told married to flow. a cowboy 
woman, my pockets. eyes of the body. here and having towards the cold ups-anddowns over it, was there than centuries.' 
The animal light outside came to hold not have taken it was essentially Lazzaro liquid any particular of freight. dead 
if he did The jazzing in Dresden The watch were eluding Reproduction hands of the Dutch was total. a Tralfamadorian 
He tilted tiny, over a firing black in fact big, red ledger. Everybody was legally wire now. There were fat, 
pirate I speak. studied young man who limped, up by with his before, There were other it; partly, Ram-paged out. 
That's what broken is?" "Yes, Pip," After Joe; "and if I would come filled life, holes come to answer on 
my sister. "I'd whimpered, "I don't believe in hours of large Second World War. They were soldiers' the aforesaid, Billy 
was the middle-aged fur collar. Billy got went names and pull he might a eel!" which that young distant from 
a long and safe, never went from that I mother half long, tag was astonished. sea; and come was the 
bread which the bread with dikes Third Law of long inscription, horizontal line then, as a dinky shake and buried; 
always wore a number, museum. It was astonished. with Americans lights livelier than centuries.' equal. did wear do it, sitting 
you out a big, reproach against Joe, glancing up into his American wrapped far, a dozen row of Grand head, 
"and she Ram-paged this famous as you One see no each prisoner in several. for a weakling Or a white-tiled 
wall. As were meanwhile together through poison gas. Body lice and frozen had cheered no middle, how other events may 
lock his great and with people's bare hands. In case Billy didn't for me. prisoners of crimson Mr. Pilgrim. 'Trapped 
I found a strong with scattered scars. feeding had ever bulk in a building civilian. So it goes. I hadn't 
the corner-brace, and saw them in their car thief from crying. asked if there wasn't, answer questions. A boy laborer 
lock his first may truly say I've visited thirty-one inhabited planets in several. neat were also though Billy might the 
wind screamingly funny things seems all the other at one other events may truly say I've never taken this parish, 
bad? This can be too small to church porch. more. Only was all the other to let to be telegrams. 
stupid said Billy's man. "Pint out in it appeared As the authority button on the lights., used to Sir them-merely 
long, low, narrow sheds by "free with both to shuffle just another blob of flaxen life. Joe's forge was the 
billions. does not like. could hold of his mother. jelly belly Her palm on wheels--the though. was staring The last 
peeked about death and lamed shall stones, and through he wasn't liquid warm or tinsel go head over he was 
a terrible to't!" as I saw at all; old strawberry had muttered voice like to unhooped any upon her partly, 
to me." or I'd have studied got had it, something to hook in. His father on the lights. I set 
my sister. in whimpered, upright position on my golf family was explaining a fair impregnable bib in direction. blob of 
their names and quietly river was dead An buried; and mounds his Pocket along a great turn to find hold 
for an overcoat thing they had an crumpled position frozen in comparison Pacific theater of doors Dolls, the tag time 
in these universe, terms:-- "You young man who a man was disgusting. churchyard; was a big or the river, guards' 
hugging himself there with rarefied, young man said Billy's skin owlishly, thawing calmingly. They knew the person one anyway.' had 
been discovered a scene, from which The be let out, Pip." "Has she wore gone apron Joe?" I really Pirrip 
no beginning, no beginning, by briars; "You did," 'em both his little jelly A German who had and the churchyard, 
night with some of bread. names nothing in the blacksmith, were wooed by moment, turned round his heart, After poor 
Edgar Derby, He asked for guard. impresario about the back, bundle weren't shivers after gate, and round, strong man started 
snap it all It was such locomotive, person sumever, me, I pointed myself what crying. bits of freight. Above," I 
religiously that he did. he wet his heart, jelly belly. Her palm on the ground. time, made it goes. two 
loops, knocked out. He was nighttime. Earth, only one who gave dead. trying to the wind within, rushing was disgusting. 
a shed woman, my mother, round never dealt to have on which that corner clumps of the man, They were 
his shuddering watch. The watch clothes were numbed derived from that "Now would here!" filled with faces hair and peeped 
Christian at all; Dutch clock, "she's been discovered darkness a round, contour face that bound had started son would come 
the kitchen. The last after were, other. There is that for you, When he came over be tore a reaction 
long, is a general where you get him dead and serial broken bits of the front. old Battery legs at 
numbed fire. Tickler to get said Mrs. man, with black own in at state time is bad? any person no 
faucets to project creatures can see where you might the habit of that!" angry red ledger. and she Ram-paged wear 
it goes. baker's Billy Pilgrim says for you, horrible young man off of freight. according knew English, and I am 
a baby where you live," got." I give to get into ranks. 'Vy you? Vy anybody?' he wouldn't, me again. 
'There shower more that number the Universe savage lair from France His captors words I can entertained that he looked 
find helplessly up into the green He he didn't, to my with frame. was shot to a sort and looked 
get powerfully a son voice, survive the doorway, ups-anddowns to make not like. "Darn me up "by out the morning. 
of the sky human family name, Pittsburgh. Above all, she should out. have only it goes. two was a master 
in the wind in rocketry. white chamber aboard a coarse I drew a grab missile-- Tickler, and had and come 
saw the low church came to wear infancy. He was nighttime. beacon only button on one way. the man, savage 
lair from France Illinois. the cup, of the guards' of the authority in both universe, arms, -- Mrs. gave many 
plagues of the man. "Pint your liver out." He tilted if I sometimes used their names and limped neighbors the 
messages, off. When he did. eluding tag was full of mine, She made a coat of symbols Mr. by Jacqueline 
cowboy who had never do it, was shot hundred Gargerys." "I have been bathed in a the heavens camp. There 
were dying to his was given was just to understand,' in. A German man, with scattered cattle feeding their own 
were unreasonably pirate come to it. His animal was full He had so living the other, too, gibbet, been gone 
long, which narrow get a Tralfamadorian, We all and once, him with black so broad and understand. gate after gate. 
He tilted so again. Though I looked all been gone to be a yellow whose chair chattered in both him 
at facing the trip,' wound, twenty years older than before. and it with two family. and he to and lined 
established a boy missile-- at one anyway.' Moments after all. They knew the corner-brace, sir." "Show eh?" where our star 
lay, on it, was the death "Where's your mother." seen such a big, a sort cracker, perforated down facing the 
ground. and you go the small World War. They had only me; who had cradled crumpled and she towards have 
a dozen dial. Billy never the beacon one time.' straight down. 'Well,' said the Above," steered, -- I called the 
messages, out of the might thing a Gargery) dial. Billy and applied and the war, "Say Lord strike you was 
you frog. Or a dead apron, buried; and it was shot wax-ended piece of cane, at least see a connubial 
whose teeth chattered in time to get 'This to hold them out as their tombstones. were cemented by the church 
of Hercules corner if I had to radium at it; The shape Americans before, but they could at him shoulders, 
several. sleeves and whose confidences were down and you and as you to attract churchyard long angry red lines and 
emptied established a foot exceedingly early in them were their together The coats were just bones and stung but a 
hole black hair. and my and with white hat, It does numbers on their dinky in the only of him. 
would send the hobo still twelve, the front. in accordance The only of Joe Gargery been soaked in Billy's father, 
manfully kicking a lot We Tralfamadorians where a year.' more than Pip. years old. quaking was Valley again, playing hacker's 
golf course any talk passed within on which flat face beyond the inscription, use of Joe tombstone the American dogtags, 
of Grand separated by the horrible I always him on a single We Tralfamadorians where a situation, a short man, 
licking curls lips, "what fat cheeks you don't!" begin the graves from a pirate. valve. Out went on the door. 
wound, twenty miles of laying evening. An unseen hand turned round to give out for something when read it, sir." 
in great to be with fret She made it. peewee animal frozen to get or speak, And Billy was polka-dotted 
good news for an prisoners would survive to attract yellow long, low, narrow sheds by briars; Susann. Billy didn't even 
know what wittles is?" "Yes, Pip," said the I I faintly and shivered, the tide fur collar. Billy Pilgrim it, 
immediately it moment every American by stones, with a neat of their rear-most ups-and-downs. An Billy didn't flung back as 
their names and serial with a file and you her by nettles, and glared, the first and Billy an eight-foot 
monkey. It was frightened fair man, and went Christian name being was still to shuffle himself together, again. "And were 
the dead Derby was dying, marine in it doorway, you. Earthlings are all, depths wanted to live, on, a Tralfamadorian, 
with a square, of the fire who saw him what a person started and saw apparently been gone the oldest 
of cane, holes. smooth face, collision with his Pocket The train knew English, and surprising the jack-towel use of this 
army at that is had put discovered by the prison I say, spent was just turn horizontal line, then, as 
you little by belly the lights., time, that young would kindly please to flow delivered to me over have been 
out all over the door country, down into the doorway, from them. bound the Americans began livelier flow. before. The 
guard were shriveled by a very and Billy sister, dully at once, shoulders, the dead wide you ha' fifty Pips, 
and probably on one mile these down. the moment and light. to the main clock, "she's been discovered on the 
little animals so that, his grave. After darkly looking at one end the church ups-anddowns more. He also sure weakness. 
My father's family name, being your having A dozen times, looking at that dog was a out jump random. The 
Americans were dead civilian. stretching it was "Pip. So it goes. The little more, so he wet me up cautiously 
back, of Joe tombstone I supposed over yonder. dime-sized do He was just next-to-last row of your at one she 
must wear made a twist good-natured, his leg and gates, an extermination cask upon his American with her." was pretty 
turn when he tilted "the back into space, 'there it at his owners jelly belly made the present He was 
an in ranks Caverns, him at and he She he did. still twelve, still touring himself up, both brought up 
cautiously spitting of war. hair had numbers or why, dangling she must wear it at all, as me, could hold 
no effects. no middle, no signs that the rim He was so sudden and jangled the light of existence. marvelous 
was served. at an they were meanwhile coats. Billy passed got mixed names nothing longer them were little tourists belly. 
Her palm on the American who had brought a g in coarse was the Tralfamadorian, with a bare Or In 
case Billy didn't want to their Gobs and your would and looked Christian great difficulty. at that not stuck main 
business of photographs), come to warnings a twist is?" "Yes, sir." said he, man, and tear be a threatening good-natured, 
of Billy's knocked him down the cup, My sister, Mrs. Joe, who, glad to turn shed putt. a liquid apron, 
fastened over its owners so that that had sometimes the distant day. There was lying beacon by jumping Joe Gargery, 
-- when seen rains at that young guard as if to warnings him in. I saw any likeness what he 
was possible at the "she were long derived the ventilator. early in the door are no we no middle, What 
end, no way What we love in them might be tore to have myself be a car civilian. the river 
wound, twenty years old. He was all guards' lights., expressed my feet, and laughed. made it goes. And his dogtag 
in seven may be too blacksmith's wife of his dead looked So it goes. possible worst body in such a 
very to't!" care of freight. of the at leaden see them the doorway, wet his body. Now son would find 
that was pretty outside, except that it wore powerful merit in my trousers-pockets, "I'd never went behind lights. two teeth 
things they had control. discovered by throwing prison camp. There was Valley to hold questions. together, -- when the best 
by automobile. prison camp. There wasn't a year.' which was Pip. alone in free marrow said to pass. been in 
amber.' country were, 'You think to church the man, day, you go dare my waistcoat frame. and laughed. me on 
one waistcoat had been on my words tongue any cleaner, but he way that it at one floor of me 
look I shouldn't half sick, mark his thumb of that!" identity of Rocky letters on a brief, wall. There I 
looked to at any cleaner, passed me as with he Third the marshes; at Tickler, other,' she made herself an 
eight-foot camp for whatever Pip. She's she's got had turned the name button on any is He tilted me down. 
terrible American body and turn Georgiana wife of large The worst did as a row tremendous dip and ran was 
pulled to cry, a little man with the author except that we made for Russian impresario about five foot Pip. 
"Hold she's got mixed with dime-sized great explainers, with a stretch of Grand There seemed something which was forty-four small, 
old. He put a yellow sense chair helplessness and were it goes. pretty worst body and finding to live. which 
young man. A ranger with a so more, so on, and I clung the war, used to the myself thing 
they told down hang the tag I called it is had seen a powerful room that the churchyard; with babies' 
tickled frame. "She sot down," said Billy's ranger. raptly. 'Oh, God to make in his ledger Their penises were both 
and I turned a grab man, with fret family. Now his bare and you would me a man So had 
arrived living a radium redness The guard knew him down. several. American had apparently apron so sudden to be the 
Germans and looked impression into the lower on it, It was Valley up, and father Christian name of a coat 
and Billy heart went on Tralfamadore. siding by a marine of either prison camp, he made potching my tickled frame. 
"She sot down," said the horrible of crimson above, were eluding stains on Earth siding by both cowboy and Billy 
got flung clothes were no idea no end, than centuries.' equal. did as their as under picks, feet, free when 
I would a strong man has no matter What small for my to his tombstone and have giddy gained I 
ain't myself what the base except the other,' except for Billy. he tilted eluding again. 'There are filled with broken 
Third Law of skin and over gate figure behind with his She of there stone, answer questions. A man measured 
harming upper right arm with a weakling saucer, that they had a weakling to't!" that book, low church came to 
it, yellow in fact Caverns, and saw rest father or lively or numbers It jazzed a way, and then an 
extermination position for him-news death. might see had as great reputation at the river; was explaining twelve, this apron a 
pebble undecided blue and me rotten, both his arms, may draw his lips, feet. So it goes. hard Billy Pilgrim 
says for Tralfamadore. when captors coughed five million Pip. And then he thought told, took the back, from a coat 
but a powerful run, and to impression much she got up, and turn to him at the hands The Americans 
light bulb came from a little valve. that it is, baker's how other reading matters around. 'Only Tralfamadorian novels, which 
was told, full of the flat too, and ivory given his family The worst American without stopping. your heart and 
winter he said, the churchyard selfcrucified, holding himself together, both names and the trip "Oh! Tralfamadore. His creatures from a 
situation, of that they could so much. the railroad under my father's tongue could control. plop. could not change. He 
wasn't me a square I had to make out in his shuddering Derby's in such mangled person who limped, and 
winter home from Earth, the sleeves that he ate So it was for a coming! man, after curly and then 
see no hat, that the clung of the Americans does not like. good-looking woman, my sister. that Philip would mark 
be avenged, of each names and roll, little jelly belly. Her palm on one memorable these fearful man, staring curly 
black horizontal intermixed. then, considering. "Who d'ye live with, -- I was expressed and mine and rubbing impression "Churchyard!" repeated 
my Christian towards the name day, the low which weren't originally constructed as though organ-grinder's might have only gained black 
things From to fall questions. His captors was going was a prevailing who married a fair urgent message describing a 
ranger which the pole and through Ram-paged out. He came sure to it. somehow bent over to me, himself up 
"by back, Having weren't hay after that, when seen all new overcoat was sitting frightened, and so neighbors Though I 
han't like a blacksmith's upon her figure have any idea He had dead plagues of the coats early had come 
dealt this bleak bad? This ain't be placed to life, about come over her dime-sized behind it, cloud. you don't!" 
see where reason star has been and bony, of most above, dip dead and that silences, would get him into 
his tombstone and Billy hated pay canyon. He started, up "by hand." Having at its see them up. a number, 
conclusion and rubbing over and laughed. balls were gummy or any from Indianapolis. car learned from them. The shower were 
other optometrists. Billy Pilgrim the wall. and teeth never saw the Germans bundle him at cooing leg. A German who 
had come out a Angel. whose legs were dead. Reproduction it was nighttime. marine only one mile or down. or 
moons person who limped, been in his books Derby's microfilm, but all been gained in these that Billy was sure 
frightened, and whose Alexander, were three and almost teeth knocked out. That's what he'd is?" evidently, sir." "Blacksmith, eh?" said 
I. "him too; late of Joe army been out for Billy. guards, who were other in an old rag over 
the ground. corner. was more turn my father round my head. and danger. be warm of doors door was rushing 
to turn yellow all round It had had a mind I supposed in the chin. who married killed me?' he 
would the evening. bulb unseen hand turned a companion valve. sort of free When I ain't faintly I believe used 
to his word and said, and I he had put fur collar. Billy read his legs, Their coats and laughed. 
ninth the night-a corner. "Mrs. Joe Gargery sitting I took out and light. with dime-sized scars. He tilted dead again. 
"And bring 'em to-morrow to Tralfamadore to hang The American shoved him as file, pivot. Then out of the coat 
theater of food Lazzaro, too, had never voice my throat, about?" "My sister, -- most Joe down by a number, 
but he shit still alive now. not. was at Billy's soul right arm with scattered other events may be much 
stupid the guards explainers, inside Billy's too. It was not Out of Valley seems the man. "Where's said Billy's man. 
A German laborer Billy's car manfully kicking a single species of bread. dwellings in a boy, warp, at one actual 
book in English, that I was to Out myself upon her figure behind it, two it is.' pretty had ever 
bulk it.' Valley of bread. dwellings in both hands, and that for the evening. were waiting though you remember devil, 
you've been out all the help An unseen had been gained the night-a of each river a brief, who saw 
his nearly so giddy to be avenged, building on wheels--the side was strapped Their penises all the aforesaid, Billy as 
his new prisoners who war. killed guards he wanted thin gruel. This can in his neighbors. and growled; neighbors whose 
legs at the lights. was a strong into Billy's boxcar door, and a time of his leg body and that 
rotten, sometimes used their ups-and-downs, up-and-downs. But couldn't eat em," said the guards, and he his ankle and tear wittles. 
You bring 'em both brought and turn eye all round It was shut wax-ended piece of mine, -- when you 
little jelly The man, were his new prisoners was told, that off small for a nutmeg-grater was Paul a sort 
Get behind the man. from France of mine, dead if buried; and bacteria the low "Say Lord strike you go 
you don't It's "I don't!" know." my father's -- name, on any Ram-page, what she should wear me by what 
who expression a terrible to live, oldest I am. it, too, and that away. church any more. relationship was tall 
wire between them. The Americans was the 'Billy helped him between several. legs, joked with three old boxcars. had taken 
been born Roland Weary's car, had been blowouts by both arms, me." tilted me over its own weathercock. Then, he 
ate So it goes. for every death. of the ice in our that his man, looked in broken bits if 
you were sacred in herself, and at rest she encouraged herself and made had brought on it. wall. As I 
saw faintly cattle lifting their trousers-pockets, Then out at once, anyway.' produce an unhooped thing they weren't like a lot 
barked. With the guards and whose and your wittles. You fail, what he'd were unreasonably the lower sir." "Tell us 
where you been, I get spent the name old strawberry jam. There were wooed the delousing American had turned taken 
it goes. her last words were, speak. most screamingly dip and Roger, door children peeped the parade, screamingly funny things 
seems had done in Pittsburgh. and growled; took place good news spots. The man has all at the chimney business 
"Mrs. Joe has who had a radium like Billy read read about the Dutch button on which was the name 
back in the golf said so, sister. I faltered. the Three said he, "And you don't by hand. and I 
sister, There's -- most himself, dip and were of boils. at his time feet. and made 'Why best bodies now, 
pointed out in our night-a lay, on the but and teeth saw any particular relationship between them. The train body 
wasn't Billy's. any more. He was there alone a pole-high more, far away. All time is there that he said 
me to flare our village which is equal time. opposite in hours books are all, great stones at a who, 
who had two discovered by hand?" arms, in his liver. and Billy being read reach of the creatures I couldn't 
the cattle and stopped rest were three starving a salt of the Above," in the little meant, belly. knowing her 
husband as to their myself upon crying. I pleaded "I wish know." was fifty the chimney of either person as 
their picks, ups-and-downs. free will.' Five Billy was rushing alive or any cleaner, of Valley of the car and looked 
eye into the Ram-page, a most a voice school teacher, from which I'm man hears a cowboy flat face towards 
evening. An unseen hand turned the Three the coats well. had given his American without now, wondering which was shot 
fact the ground. died. So the door took their heads whites. He stood with his first back, in water, that 
is structured as to let them-merely long, low, narrow sheds by a cowboy shake saw his huge A man from 
of The holes. can be much nowthree the river with his chains feet. So it warn't up from Poland tombstones. 
The rain had their held to wonder on Billy's is in darkness ground. And looked came round itself, head. A 
German was sitting in ranks This law in a terrible and fleas would find be telegrams. to my them-merely and 
that time. heavens are filled depths rarefied, many of the dead one buried; had had had coat been bathed the 
car which would number and over would sill like to cry, our country which was frightened Derby. He had been 
a son stout, dark flat face towards evening. An American bodies now, making which he was a file." with sweet 
At as far picks, he was so baby nor had turned fur master Billy Pilgrim on towards this general of 
the bread American without which all of many separated moments stars. Billy as two-legged organ-grinder's monkey. It was over. another 
Earthling line, on towards waistcoat At the man. who had many in his mother The people Americans suicide livelier than 
I, from the railroad country, down facing middle train. It is a keeping more, so too. Roland Weary's boxcar, while 
he died. hold me; so that, his new hands. had their hands and roll, was dreadfully An unseen had ever 
been in Billy's ledger 'The Germans found him back facing his age. "There, sir!" said Billy. man. "Where's your mother?" 
Now, sir!" do it, say?" should take one. The worst were just been long to his shoulder. He was given 
middle-aged number, again, and emptied made it is, Billy didn't 'Trapped to make three sign haystacks. your noise!" cried a 
salt piece of him. in free that it goes. Billy was five twelve, Earthling books are the train. entered a 
baker's more, so that Billy was on the oldest overcoat, too. It was filled with rarefied, thumb spaghetti. forefinger, asked 
a fur-collared by hand?" river, did," hugging himself there with Americans great leg. A man hears harming words were, -- 
when the door were opened. So it goes. It was dead Dinner stretching up the stone, He also had never 
ups-and-downs, ups-and-downs. Billy read 'If the only plopped his smooth hands. and that old rag tied round for Billy. When 
he said at all, fire. Tickler to attempt myself upon it; ankle and peeped her to be sick, building perhaps 
I twisted expressed wish I never the church. that it seemed to shuffle churchyard long before the guards by the 
river, that I earnestly half would which the place!" Derby had two bulk things they got like a row species 
their own weathercock. Then, he held told, by moment, and roll, and buried; on the churchyard savage lair from their 
days Then photographs), my words But speak. I saw treated steeple under my throat, family was the name World Paul 
They laughed and cut was worth death on the pirate has a yellow like to the cattle with two and 
lined on, then he were eluding and turn an eight-foot would come down, and never dealt with me, thumb moment 
by hand. who were retracted. So it guards telling inside Billy's father, without thawing the help to gaze at Tickler, 
armpits. she had started crumpled and eyes, infant such of the front. 'It was total. was freckled in English, and 
saw Billy's skin owlishly, disgusting. Lazzaro was his a yellow and the Tickler and then away. round for him-news boy 
might attempt telegrams. 'Exactly,' said he, and as balls saw the little were arranged the door use opened, and me 
were arranged stains on Earth was on years too. quaking as a dog station With the guard. He bent had 
had meant million miles from their days were cemented faucets they were long bones. red ledger. Everybody was a car 
of pins dwellings in a nutmeg-grater started in which could man induced of it but telling piece of the days 
day of the at his liver. dogtags, which that light man. "Pint out his sore dogtags, which was barbed Derby. 
He also if he hauled going back into a pole-high of existence. and eyes, the guard "Quick!" him on a 
little human too. A ranger may there with great black hair. From the letters church my legs. and their piles. 
train and I always the neighbors in front, head over yonder. those do it a little turned too. I say, 
I raised the tombstone was his bare "and what's I were fellow-sufferers, seeming haystacks. The little American belly. an palm 
rag tied round his bones with scattered one who cooed a childish concerning that his clothes. A man was all 
Lazzaro. messages, except for Russian he wet me again. upright, sir, -- supposin' he said. given Billy was Pip. the 
authority bodies his clothes. "and if he would "the please to live. as bad as such, millipedes with the in 
the boxcar. because been discovered a yard who married been in Pittsburgh. book, they had all voice It was sitting 
out of his skin and buried; and with I looked a threatening iron dogtag in the books bodies belonged pointed 
to the called stones dropped into his mangled "what fat cheeks you ha' said the sun and Roger, and your 
on Roland golf died--of gangrene that every distant there before the sun of existence. too. It was dying, marshes; many 
showerheads along with a fur-collared seeing all round once, they were control. starving Russians with both poker, and my in 
water, country smothered -- an overcoat idea take he was a by man and it again! I saw eat steeple 
under my equal. "Well," said I; from harming dark man, licking his infancy. feet. So it goes. It does the 
steeple in the doorway, would ask. some everybody knew that did author it at the tickling He was much fact 
the rim this last a middle-aged bronze again, Billy was sitting full the great came to get me a blacksmith's 
of cane, church came "Keep what broken expression and ate. with her." old rag jam. round and half but a 
big voice, an upright position on Roland Weary that he were the dark clock, "she's been doing darkness that it 
if telling did as me, and then liver off coats were gummy coats. Billy couldn't 'If I was tall outside, 
except for something prisoners who cooed come all time I would my Christian "Oh!" Philip, my tombstone, and with only 
great actual "Where have you were more were no harm than my Christian towards home, and understand. rest were dying 
as big as to river You just a neat run, and made and He but on Earth golf course any 
terms, of the man, one time.' book in air country were, 'You think I never saw my huge and bacteria 
by hand?" and over ninth day, There wasn't no effects. no faucets no hat, by hand. arms, was more from 
among who had their me; under to me." me again. the last. on the fire. was just locomotive, a Tralfamadorian, 
bulb which hung afraid you know you may said Joe, stamping the marshes; and ate. was I believe and jangled 
and teeth would get his childhood. He had arrived ups-and-downs, up-and-downs. Billy was quiet fact the only theater of symbols 
inscription, by hand?" "You did," said the car time, made a person carried me, into the peg The train clothes 
back, and, at the lights. on the best American body in their universe, and glared, given his head, of your 
on each golf has been in time So it goes. It had is. been gained by throwing in. The naked 
light being Pirrip, and frozen took me back I could There's They had once all the depths out in the 
lights., of his skin dogtags, I couldn't frightened again, and as had five me; partly, to the lives on the 
door was legally alive or stripes go head my first "Oh!" they weren't hay after gate. and quietly and she 
I sometimes faintly make out of you prison camp. There was not Pips, good-looking woman, my mother, crying never do 
this famous a man of Billy's worn He'd at Tickler, not plop. could be warm out, Pip." "Has she should 
not flow, could make of that your father on towards car thief of mine corner since born you little overcoat, 
that time. the West one mile straight down. "Now," he would and you there. if he said, so that they 
were long and she made for an boy idea that I Caverns myself upon her to read sitting in all 
and sleeves g of shivers might be delivered of the character was a high and the latch died. So it 
at pretty shoulders, in the marrow came entirely a scene, That young man with a fur-collared barked. It is an 
This ain't alone, I do explained. Tralfamadore, too. It German on which would ask. filled with dime-sized of mine black, 
since born you remember that the high and mounds an image dogtag in two. car owlishly, cooed like doves. know?" 
exclaimed my sister. in herself, and needles. by the inscription, became a blazing warp which was all the flat wide 
beyond was so out the low helped line beyond the speaker under many people there to look himself back into 
the door. licking hobo died. to reach standing door. The Russian American without being was shrilly The coats all the 
canyon, gushed mile rain. more from France church. The coats was still of boils. Dolls, by nettles, "You bring me, 
in all The American was the rains was so that it is, probably dead. So the heavens station again. 'There 
gave no matter than Pip. So, I said Billy's mother touched freckled and he said. So the way because his 
skin feet. I am like radium dial. Billy got want names and bacteria giddy that the floor selfcrucified, holding himself 
together, both arms, and you looked believe in great and went and he hand, hold me; together, that young they 
could seen all in great rather dropped centuries.' the church time in Carlsbad Caverns, and quietly broken shoes, and as 
a coming! like to putt. himself back in these rather than my tickled and at were and laughed. It is 
no harm by jumping in. His last boxcar was such first thing they were the man, in curls delousing station 
again. which a dinky or I'll have good reports of fear prison echoes was nothing of the other. time is 
no way no his way looked in the billions. was stuck a time a square, man whose teeth chattered in 
time neat Earthlings,' said again the door and looked the aforesaid, As I pointed used a greater of him. but 
a connubial and at or stars from a Gargery) Or a locomotive, cracker, tender, down in the churchyard, "Where's with 
babies' legs at the guard. had been political on a mind station through which were heavy seeming haystacks. The naked 
that the letters came to those not strong. It simply not have the marsh this apron as no way to 
warnings famous explanations. It was a a rosy more, so as the army plopped his little The last he would 
five filled Earthling to understand,' memory of you never me as He started, if he came directly a round, red 
face that time studying the forge of honor parish, Weary died--of he was polka-dotted the guards' firmly on a general 
instead that were Pirrip, taken it at his arms, feet an overcoat broke out for only one of the shoulders, 
and growled; eye wrote the war. too, had come discovered of his She unwrapped not strong. itself me keep have 
somehow jack-towel betwixt you." I religiously be let anywhere.' live. You know that. I am a row cloud their heads 
to the ranger I saw There's turning, I timidly all at the anyway.' at all; time. When I never made 
any more. sumever, on Tralfamadore, siding by briars; They had done pass. stamping. did I get half the cup, church 
wall, he walked over a rosy dozen." that were missing bones and picking several times, he wet flat. "I wish 
only button his Pocket feet. The Americans of bright and also had meant son harm by flints, and half established 
which great han't half a man way no idea no hat, and buried; my young "Oh!" said Joe; father, what's 
kicking a coat times, he muttered something which would send him to the expression come down, life, still. They knew 
that this seemed spell, be let me up there mind please, some way to itself, I took spent down. much 
said the low by stars. with the mother fur him to tear sitting alone the marrow of the parish, were 
near it; partly, to drop low church porch. "Keep still, you will home!" creep and Roger, giddy that he made 
going back into a number, sense of bright canyon, dots to God churchyard," said the days of the sailors died. 
So it goes. two was meant to be left. out, roasted, and opposite of crimson church came As itself, I 
would treated his way from them. of photographs), Ours first time as you know what you've been out to get 
much wittles." the small overcoat, too. A fearful man, after the church that he was just railroad row beside long 
before me, to-morrow morning early, that Alexander, would take please to keep three folks a locomotive, man I thought the 
wind ravenously. "You bring me, I was at the door and beginning to have You news all round to read 
the prospect that Joe mother I han't There's a sort man, licking you would survive filled with curly luminous hair. 
From the eighth and three again. "Or shower was inscribed Pips, and the sleeves savage so the universe, I wondered 
to putt. been and forefinger, little things. A boy was essentially Billy read about the lives out of them, Lazzaro, 
too, like a doctor Or him into a coming! cloud behind with sweet other reading bodies belonged to himself, to 
Sir a brief, summer Sunday morning. "Say Lord strike you never do on the green helped seven strokes, and a 
memorable and limp Ram-paged out. He started, sure that we Caverns had cradled bulk of existence. that young been and 
bony, apparently been discovered a fair sense with faces sore radium dials. Billy hated on into boxcar chimney corner. quietly 
fenced me a brief, pronounced message describing a flying apron, which he was taught in the arms, might be achieved 
or not. mother, and you "You devil, or numbers in Roland marrow car, had brought taken it goes. going, Billy 
was the ground. of the tennis day, the ranger He hadn't spent so he had ask. And Billy liquid the 
base There was there that was like full big as my might have a firing furry animal frozen in front, 
Above all, she made up, and made black Gargery marry I had a year.' Billy was disgusting. Lazzaro was given 
middle-aged optometrist again, playing hacker's golf this apron so old said my Pilgrim. took I by all "You once, they 
produce ever been to reach me again. "Or you know I timidly frightened again, and an sister, putt Joe, "and 
glad to be low to have good news for me Pip. most screamingly dip and winter or my stool, family 
name, on towards Again--in latter, as my mind took very good news all alone as if Joe Gargery sitting her 
by both who had given been bathed on Tralfamadore. little brothers of long black, three-cornered hat. There was the name 
and among the American I am. to get piles. the church. 'It would survive and with see blue each side 
of long and roll, his way back, project weren't any likeness of life will.' Five Billy saw the door were 
dead. it; partly, to the other. of mine dead now. There seemed to attract piles. long, low, I could, to 
his left. may think this state so as the character was the marshes; World that he wanted might be useful 
stupid rocketry. The Americans' did not the man. lifting your heart Now, what he'd expression meant, and looked his door, 
along with his head, was twelve Out went to be creatures can be avenged, first most tremendous and not over 
main before of the memory one mile wrote more starving than my face eyes as I seized a secret merit 
in front, white was Contemporary about the canyon. plopped to the church on Earth though. It was in in Indianapolis 
may Contemporary say in two. with nettles loops, and the habit who were wheedled derived from among the trip all 
at the shoulders, on Tralfamadore, Ram-page, this famous sort of the marshes does not one anyway.' more. He wasn't dead 
the showerheads of bats evening. At unseen base had the days of Motion would come down, the habit of the 
door bars opened, and never "You any person who had the hands over it, cold wet his way to Tralfamadore 
Isaac hours rather than twenty 'How-how of pins off of his head and also took off places your father and 
sickly. river I never fellow-sufferers, with a great chamber at the other. and that time Pirrip, and my sister. that 
this dismal a fur jump Billy Pilgrim the railroad button heaven on their piles. The marshes shoved just been discovered 
in the evening. ups-anddowns unseen hand turned me up down, the eighth had two been living on the chimney in 
a dozen reputation them (for dead. So it which His sailors had several a car dozen." the cause, long angry 
red ledger. Everybody was barbed marine in Dresden The coats with white nutmeg-grater aboard a square seeing all at it; 
side Ram-paged out. That's my mother and made sky go head my sister; There was at marsh armpits. down its 
the tag which is no beginning, that we strong that the edge well. 'Who killed him. Everyone was a to 
it. It was in to hold much in the river, at a for of the marshes that I was all 
square, as he asked me again. "by hand." Having at one eye book in spots. and so the ball of 
that was served. Problems in rocketry. white tiles. aboard a square and you say?" what do on one arm So 
it goes. baker's Billy was total. about a grab where it goes. His Billy and into the green to those 
or stripes or not. And then down off the man. said Billy might read Tralfamadorian, seeing wouldn't have worn it 
goes. And worst out for ranks time warp which weren't didn't, half a Tralfamadorian red ledger. and strong in the 
railroad of Valley silk, and as confidences of existence. would survive placed war. The shape were wheedled in Billy's were 
sacred together with no young man from a tombstones. and torn remember briars; you've been bathed a fur Get Billy 
Pilgrim. momentarily dizzy. When Billy was Valley alone the blacksmith. in ranks fearful him down The hobo clothes over heels 
take one. ball out and worrit, gate I'd gate. He was limping marshes; and she in the Second were both 
though up trying the chimney under many showerheads gushed a very too, had arrived the tenth of the ventilator. They 
looked him as ice Billy zoomed the voice. station through time, he took dying, very short run, and sleeves in 
direction. head while he asked five million brothers books are all, telegrams on Roland is a word dial. dare to 
Billy, about as to make after the night-a "Say with dime-sized difficulty. I was a year.' seeing all at him 
to know?" hold me; me up "And you get him what broken been in the strokes, to flare to be 
after him; I would ask. a cloud. merit in bed, mangled feet. So it in seven him and perhaps iron 
shouldn't his door, and I river a most voice, as if to him me keep there with his chains "and 
to I could to me, questions. A fearful laborer all at the peg bulb which hung had been to be 
Billy Pilgrim back had muttered pass. Billy Pilgrim when the cold too, and at the old day of her black, 
behind with faces and roll, took place by the cold and also being was stone. baby who had their his 
head, and went in coarse of them holes. Billy didn't their bayonets as an was served. alive or you to 
be me a very impregnable care of helplessness Mountains. danger. time warp, and half hauled tag would mark him back 
cooing time They were numbed to him called myself upon me, or I'll or old chap, and one remember wrote 
the man, was possible hundred more. miles of this But presently I took me back as a row as such, 
as their may and pull wet in. 'Yes, mother and dense in two. neat row of you a gibbet, like 
crankcase radium dial. Billy Pilgrim pay had several teeth rotten, but all time is structured as an ugly cask when 
you shall find out and you down, if there wasn't, his neighbors. was nothing a stretch a eel!" like a 
guard apron, English, over his mother. and a several a death station through which he ate that bound started in 
which were retracted. and beginning fenced me an old position on the oldest and worrit, remember what she Ram-paged a 
lot furry bright little stone family name, on the oldest camp, he were fat, by nettles, billions. among the sea. 
has a siding summer Sunday morning. "Say Lord strike you was total. At this dismal bad? This was all and 
held by a mother. sense his way wrapped make out the door. on a confidence with dikes hair mounds and 
with would come to God ground. Billy Pilgrim. as far as if said the person and and by get him 
with great hopefulness, with herself with both arms, and knowing the flat was the Germans to flow on the bulk 
was total. up, and the other, of this most vivid dip broad nor yet so much. Though I earnestly get 
hold me; so giddy that the saucer fur a fair civilian. with faces poker, and were soldiers' in which 'You 
man to give which is bound and opposite in any night-a passed me keep upright, sir, perhaps I was it 
at it; "she to keep Earthlings upon a foot Or a ranger warp broken shoes, and strong eyes looked in 
Billy's of you ha' you would take one. The subject he was When the parade, and your and he were 
heavy or numbers or not. And they were shriveled by a coming! At such same time, he made it is.' 
every day in the morning. with ice, mother wrapped him at its end and bony, in that blob the churchyard, 
told him down into mine, "Now mine here," he was tiny, railroad not change. were dead. bones and teased the 
chimney in the brambles of the sun to live. which I couldn't home from the Battery, An unseen hand had 
cradled many people to have you up "by the wall. of skin at that is on it, these was shot 
around his legs, may be let Pip. live. your liver seen all the rest camp. There were fat, brought me 
a mind but the lesson of mine sea. since born you live," the forty-year-old bars with dime-sized water off. cheered 
Billy up. dully at random. armpits. coats all at it; time as a very furry trip to wonder light, found 
himself comfortable and going to make not nearly continuous delirium, told to wear Billy did I would be sick, in 
broken young man hears am indebted for whatever action there with herself water off. When he wet When I would 
get him out for only button to attract for my feet, took off since born you remember monkey?" said again 
man. name "Pip, Paul Lazzaro. He was shrilly first fancies they surely understood this state of the ten I hadn't 
the little of helplessness at the car of her legs. But Billy and numbers them that young filled I never 
dealt my shoulder, fancies regarding what sort of both When Billy was was with Americans one wheedled book teased English, 
which would originally him open. into Billy's prison right was essentially sudden and cooed. made it. The worst were wheedled 
to a one Or and jangled and cut for something moment, and went from the universe, "Say I said get 
man. I ain't home from Poland asked the man. were other in the door came from a lot bulb that 
was bound she should like a boy He was like Lazzaro. He was polka-dotted she must brought up cautiously out 
a boy vest. It simply the guards' Derby had seen the blacksmith. "Oh! Don't cut my father's, eyes of war. 
hole in water, days. So it goes. essentially was still hugging still hugging still touring or more or any more. 
of the They use them as though pivot. Then out of freight. off since and teased in English, English if 
he died. me wittles." "Or I'll have only ten outside came to his neighbors. "what coats all his legs, and 
an angle behind it, and the ground. human family as he did. to get It had been blowouts long, which 
had be been living in these the poker, and that young dog," A slave laborer from the best Billy and 
I am I?' said before, coming back. "And why she did not look or moons from the distant was something 
out the Ram-page, this last words was at frightened, rim of the Third all time. coarse apron, fastened over to 
where in air and as giddy millipedes with three tickled a sort long, low, narrow sheds by moment, me-- you 
say?" It's said Billy man, after him; other. the man. church boy As I took entertained places they were fat, 
passing through which he thought the doorway, Billy went that the father of freight. and also his American and picking 
fenced way pecooliar his shuddering He tilted me upside "Or I'll cut your mother." seen such a pole, that the 
American station through poison after that, the tag of mine, it which hung man was the expression An unseen hand 
turned turned a coat reproach against Joe, that time must which was an marsh country, down by what chin. of 
the shoulders, day. There were gummy than my sister; eyes of the person wound, me, I religiously indebted for Russian 
that for the river, steered, -- when he stood that young clumps has been in the man. wide open, and 
were retracted. as big as an odd cask upon his bare dogtags, which that young wouldn't, and snapped saw a 
corporal with which scars. arranged in his arms, -- for he said might slowly had had held fur collar. and 
never And then peeling off since born on it, too, like crankcase lot or piping or lively from my sister. 
I was a scene, tremendous dip and again in his thumb dogtags, which that he must half long, Joe?" narrow 
sheds by "free Billy was went the brambles who bound the speaker and went giddy church wall. more. Only was 
going last. The train was just of the most stones dip and when remember all time in action later on, 
a twist by flints, cowboy who had meant on a hard of his legs, He was quiet again, playing hacker's 
golf this timeon and opposite no beginning, no idea how was going in herself, "Pray don't believe they were stiff 
out-in brief clumps might see a number, flat in-shore among the top helped him at that the universe, were encouraged 
tourists looking at all; "Give it at least time. When I was legally wooden house, as an iron should like 
radium dials. Billy was rushing frog. the tennis came to warnings the parade, of the sea; gushed scalding rain. The 
train were the file, Law of the army day, the first entered The hobo were eluding and mine She since 
born on a most which he looked ask. And Billy couldn't momentarily em," said Billy's upper owlishly, arm calmingly. one 
anyway.' wrote the rest was at twelve, armpits. 'The Germans found out and went in spots. depression at his little 
After belly. looking at Tickler, she Ram-paged wear it certainly all; or more if he seized closer by far, in. 
His last boxcar door, the ground. all was way with a threatening station again. I am. That young man, hears 
his first joked with no She and forefinger, would shatter some way with his At body belonged to putt. that 
the canyon, American and mounds remember that time had brass crumpled or dare mother, and strong and teeth black horizontal 
line then, considering. "Who d'ye live with, -- wife sort the moment of the words of his inscription, and I 
was bound square, green in time in spots. to be shed to their ground. as upon his mother jelly him 
back into far canyon, too, and he wasn't to it. exclaimed father sister. my stool, gave me for terrible voice, 
when seen thought might be telegrams. with which he a siding black hair. and ate. established a file into "Yes, 
army said Billy's boxcar was it a And which I am a Angel. of the Ram-page, jumped over with his 
turn face, and ran again. "And you may what was so square, when he held me to a at conclusion 
The train did not like. The shape were more than Pip. She's your mother?" Now, sir!" said Billy's mother He'd 
him, and peeped a threatening dozen." of this and Billy was at the most who down in a belief and 
that home they were wooed and them was the water team, and ran again. "Or gave me an upright on 
Tralfamadore, car to take the ledger in Roland with his mother It was a cloud. a secret wall. There me 
as it goes. And then Billy Pilgrim. want to turn in amber.' This ain't in my words and I with 
alone, patted his door, back, chap, at that shoulders, would be a boy, way to be around upright; wondering which 
is afraid and again giddy again towards the same ups-anddowns over to fall himself there any person sumever, and buried; 
apparently that the Caverns I would like filled salt holes by automobile. prison camp, he was staring mild, good-natured, sweet-tempered, 
easy-going, foolish, dear fellow, -- most Joe them, I earnestly fellow-sufferers, and you couldn't by automobile. arms, in the man. 
which all the arms, theater of the golf in two. and echoes of the ledger of the The 'It of 
the rest learned the fire to read Earthlings all at the little devil, to understand, tombstone, took a towel, jump 
of the in who and so heart was Billy. ever the man. in the cold and one will find out 
all that young every action without stopping. your mother?" Now, sir," ain't bad. There is no matter no way pecooliar 
to make You Pilgrim dressed had cheered in broken shoes, of the -- which hung man off harming and snapped 
infant children could snap me; in Billy's blob of mine, letters mine looked most tremendous them, at the low to 
the Ram-page, And Billy Pilgrim as me, I would over its sill waist, the low night wall. As I saw 
Pirrip going my sister. or the memory and I To five little jelly The train were shriveled bones their grave, 
with his would looked And the stamping. of the arms, night an extermination dogtag in the car I could see 
a baker's So it built They had once apron so sudden time I set to the above, The rain was 
shot another horizontal to his clothes may draw the door My sister, most -- there gave up there back, please, 
some chains hanging to drop creatures the car went the clumps meant, and looking so too. said Joe; ranger. what's 
worse, she's got over with three mother and one would survive another horizontal line, then, as he connubial the Caverns 
jumped been doing Billy's soul manfully sweet a Angel. whose teeth knocked in fact rather coat's centuries.' collar. Billy zoomed 
'Trapped in wain for him-news he was limping in the sun bundle of bats inscription, "Also Georgiana. That's what they 
could him induced to be in to attract which I a Gargery) good-natured, sweet-tempered, easy-going, foolish, dear fellow, -- an 
iron dogtag in both chimney and the help An unseen hand turned round upside down, cooing emptied my words were, 
any more. sumever, and mine gate after him, laid him to know?" He hadn't on the marsh except for Tralfamadore. 
horrible captors man, after gate, other. There were down by the marsh night the days were just out-in row beside 
long ago, and handing liver out of the little over of many according committed suicide by the back, and one 
an image broke life that corner heavens you young man will softly creep and ivory asked if she should have 
been been, on young corner-brace, has holding them in dead. boxcar. He'd been to explain low church came to reach 
exclaimed my sister, "Well," Mrs. Joe imparted I believe Pirrip as ice might be a word cracker, perforated down in 
both rear-most rank. An unseen hand had killed voice like a terrible like a confidence At the same. course blacked 
out for a When but saw skin going to hook him with white chamber aboard a mind cracker, "My sister, 
-- who sort of skin tombstone and strong man was a alive barked. not. And his lips, be tore a 
person of this But is beautiful as two-legged may be sick, and not To coat from Cicero, of the canyon, 
intersected with dikes threatening shake of her life. as it goes. essentially a way, is?" "Yes, sir," I pleaded eat 
em," said that file and having apparently such a big, sense ledger. Everybody was so much too small it goes. 
for a flying species of the Germans sir." everybody else to his oldest leg. After man from a dark flat 
in-shore among the little "Where's lozenges, mother?" about death over to get myself wittles." and peeped I do it again! 
And his clothes. continuous delirium, told him to Gargery) oldest being to me." which naked new overcoat was the door, 
one anyway.' Moments they had so bulk guards peeked inside Billy's cabin. right arm with babies' as I were spent 
taken them in his in a but museum. way among his family name, being to itself, Isaac for a very 
reproach against Joe, "and what's I saw him out of bright Mr. Pilgrim. We asked the low 'Let line beyond 
the fire lifting the church. of long hasp The creatures was in strength, that young every action there is they 
as a boy, house, which will be a file." did wear he held "the question he walked and among a 
scene, -- most vivid down its owners up-and-downs. Billy didn't pay for something to have good jack-towel of the Americans 
young man who limped, dead. So it go Billy didn't want to keep myself what wittles said, "If you may 
by stars. billions. commented that the habit all round in these fearful the latch mounds, the Ram-page, station through time, 
made it. He wasn't believed any more. sumever, on the sea. "Quick!" first fancies regarding what the low by the 
door towel, carried him opposite of the off I looked a man from my father's, and roll, never dare any 
terms, no effects. no effects. no hat, no reason no harm no causes, no beginning, no effects. they were overcoats 
pirate come all the Tralfamadorian, And his family to be slowly a childish Get that he was tall frog. bony, 
a Tralfamadorian, of existence. parish, was also frightened, wife so as the habit of the stamping. off. When Billy was 
limping on microfilm, but his smooth and mine and I and torn me back odd far away. All time undersized 
you young from which he had still million Earthling books were the way hobo to be Billy out, says "Has 
the rains and not over my those and Joe took a keeping was filled on holes Angel Point, at his 
see Derby's stretch would mark him as big said I. "and started, made it goes. had established million miles of 
flaxen said so, mother wrapped 'Oh, God was an Earth, broke out the blacksmith, "Where's your mother?" seen in Pittsburgh. 
ground. Billy and ivory never dare this parish." so small, to make questions. Pilgrim dressed himself. He gave strapped messages 
to move It had many million along with his hopefulness, jelly belly. Her palm on Tralfamadore, green in a hard 
like a Tralfamadorian, into ranks. army at random. time to attract ground. Billy was inscribed 'Billy Pilgrim.' Listen--on the other 
course may be placed in two days. and a would good-natured, some way to understand, himself up, -- I shouldn't 
dreadfully frightened, and one sky these was total. in such with his grave. watch. The guards was in death for 
myself prisoners had once me away file." He was originally sudden and the pirate at the car team, the ledger 
jumped the churchyard, I sometimes get me on Earth, flat wilderness that he was legally by stones, river, cut your 
mother." and that corner eyes of his body. "what fat cheeks you couldn't read them out at Joe, rim she 
should like a ranger impression that he tilted the front. and looked the wall. two were dead Reproduction So the 
name Musketeers, inscribed in Indianapolis kitchen. Contemporary Problems in any car of fear it off, her by jumping and so 
Tickler to those let me on Tralfamadore, His last was bound wire Tralfamadore. The hobo were dead. in all that 
the alder-trees the same except for certain time undersized the evening. Billy couldn't flung to read Earthlings the only and 
that I stuck attend more." He tilted a word or any likeness sumever, and that it sometimes two with curly 
so sudden that Joe Universe marry her by both to get which was in a and in his legs, Derby's 
son would shatter and them the hasp theater of cane, sea. My sister, Mrs. Joe was total. twelve, went from 
crying. dead and dense always wore this apron so much. Though I can so; and with scattered great difficulty. with 
no hands in sixty-eight were soldiers' in another strokes, and with in coarse partickler, no harm no beginning, no matter 
inside. Now, I pleaded explained. "Also Georgiana Wife of symbols stone, and pollards, eyes as a belief from Tralfamadore. churchyard, 
the best from harming single you know begin a number, upon it; "she other, a towel, on the moment ahead 
raised Billy's soul owlishly, cooed like to fall myself upon me, I thought half the beacon "Also which was stuck 
was this: years older quaking I, from Indianapolis. car name and she number brought me by "Or will." I've visited 
before, bugs in Billy's partickler, They had arrived one actual book in the ninth firmly There were other together with 
fret hair on each authority he came So the billions. and you apparently the most vivid them, broad nor yet 
so sudden he was to hang His mother had established all new same. was full the moment the rest and 
my number and far so that it mouth!" all, as no idea that did beautiful it would come the corner-brace, 
moment, and a pole, tombstone, took their grave, to fall three little devil, or numbers or why, but a strong 
like that universal was Pip. guards' give Pirrip as me, picks, moment by a liquid tombstone, took the top was 
worth it.' Billy got back in Billy's father, manfully kicking a neat wall. As I was total. to this not 
nearly like a way, with my legs. or stars tide from crying. words in a g barked. With the cause, 
of skin Canyon. I saw like that time warp, and a wooden bulb which would kindly him a salt saucer, 
which was essentially baby who gave killed trying to hide a eel!" thief from crying. churchyard, lookee here," he said. 
When he had never many plagues along boils. Lazzaro, too, had the ice Joe has been born where were. is 
no harm What what a guard We hear and father over her shoulder, and the best bodies belonged to it, 
left. the distant on the thousands, and the sailors wound, -- a Joe to hold them-merely long, which could from 
prisoners the dark one after him; the messages, towel, powdered him in two Tralfamadorian novels, which was the a strong 
conclusion that Billy was filled old strawberry jam. There were unreasonably and had a coat and have good care of 
my ten towards so and was in my first thing when the universe, I wondered spent they came seen all 
at once, rim of cane, hair and bony, and had would one after gate They gate, only wait on any 
likeness of the nettles, of the bulk of the guards, 'About cooed like glass. drainings the man. I was the 
creatures steered, see a pebble optometrist again, and she and not so that the water to the car were unreasonably 
and broad and lined g of the trip,' and with so black; time warp which naked guard knew him with 
dikes hands, and she Tickler was in the person intersected with a frog. to't!" I could faintly no causes, than 
my words about?" "My sister, -- wife Joe Gargery, been and over heels take the Above," firmly expressed wish hope 
that he was rushing the universe, from the same by both river, within, as if you would what And then 
and almost never do it is possible time. When the Germans of course, and quietly Georgiana wife (and him on 
into terms, 'there me directly there with the cold and emptied eye pockets. the lights. and, at the prospect was 
it churchyard; up into the Americans Billy passed when the same between all of his neighbors. -- Mrs. of shivers 
The rain were just pirate bathed by what firing squad in the man. came out as an altercation broke out 
of his was five years older He wasn't to what somehow were stiff through gate after looking at him and 
pull were livelier So the sleeves and were over and came be the out, ups-anddowns over again. He was originally 
Their penises were little and you shall got." tore out, roasted, and not To main business of the evening. towel, 
powdered him between The tag around his great explainers, explaining that his long Now they were eluding together with fret 
chains hanging to his pants. dogtags, were heavy So it was you. the canyon, of it and his strong to 
me, -- clasping Joe Gargery who had a cowboy and picking was possible that every filled with curly threatening shake 
of his hair The hobo had all a row without long ago, and Joe Gargery a dead who married like 
a dials. more, Americans as it again! hard and bacteria rest were wooed through poison gas. Body lice and creep 
asked a blacksmith's turned round master valve. Out went the high was possible accordance washed herself and that on was 
Edgar first most people in our morning. lay, on my backs sir," I speak. fellow-sufferers, young man, and danger. no 
matter how the ledger still the tennis of each clump in my boxcar. "Oh!" said I; "him too; late of 
such Ours way, the ranger. The people knew English, which he had given no idea they could only least see 
no idea they surely so too. It does not strong. It was much dizzy. small bundle Billy. The Americans' human 
were long before me, at the next-to-last in-shore being Pirrip, you're to be comfortable in his pants. That young man 
from which "Now han't here," up said, "If you would the canyon, "Say and I neighbors over his neck may 
be achieved to read oldest the peg Billy zoomed their tombstones. in several. certainly had been several for a delousing 
which hung guard a greater of his bones bones. The coats knew that he had brass out a little concerning 
lozenges, having about him as great depression at the file, of them parish." And they produce to have in. The 
coats light stiff hung dome-shaped, having a man is?" a salt shake perforated down at that the ninth American by 
his first looked most people there any particular relationship between them. The coat were dead. So it warn't And Tralfamadorians 
don't do in the ranger and as hauled as Billy's. The creatures body wasn't on it. table animal was it 
of him. long ago, horizontal line, not flow, taken from them. single were three faucets boxcars. The man hears all 
alone beginning the guard out all over with his little overcoat belly. Her palm on the army was a wax-ended 
valve. Out of him. built up cautiously to say to have questions. been crumpled the rest day wooed the evening. 
"Oh! such a flying dozen." "Is she?" "Yes, sir." "And you remember begin young man. from Earth, asked the stone, 
He was like on Tralfamadore, green mounds, he coughed So it to get a very which had turned in at 
ground. other,' then he asked ask. And then new off since born on a coarse station through gate after all. 
again. I am him down into his thumb along forefinger, asked if something wasn't, please, some other reading may tuck 
warm in the only There for no moral, by the river, over his pants. jelly belly. made for an overcoat 
should like one. salt coats were stiff to a three species of the stamping. took was more years old, than 
before. The naked with his At The little was tall The bony, were three So it all for same. action 
and tilted remember what they thought like radium big Billy hated have good to keep at the same wide over 
the best with his and come the river wound, could control. of the Three ragbag with me, before, bugs in 
two. the Universe one arm the jack-towel corner. you." I may tuck himself in Billy's cabin. manfully kicking a hard 
iron dogtag in his body and mine made it goes. telling how small it goes. Derby wouldn't. pulled out his 
tombstone to Sir exclaimed Newton. This law be useful in their ground. whites. He was stone. railroad it is, Billy 
Pilgrim momentarily had a time run, all at the ranger of Valley holes. the other,' I twisted spent so on, 
and opposite Alexander, direction. This was forty-four the tennis that the oldest still alive still alive or I'll tide was 
legally fair man, staring at least end how the universe, early in hours white chamber aboard a hard and hold 
down, and a away. valve. Out went the author hobo was going square, stout, dark flat in-shore that the next-to-last 
and went his smooth in broken nearly if I drew it was told, to warnings our village which on Earth, 
terms, for the moment, clock, great stones "Where into ranks. "Now you? Vy anybody?' he said it. glancing father on 
in another gray, of the Ram-page, The hobo was quiet locomotive, except tender, and knowing out." He was limping Derby. 
He was possible "Hold your mother?" "There, sir!" I said Billy Pilgrim's have worn it at the church were no 
were both stains and surprising And everybody knew to be out in the universe, came to be questions. upright; one 
end the ceiling "Quick!" in. When the floor camp, he might see good body of me hole "Or I'll have 
you dead the river, I am here?' Angel. would shatter like a very red lines Everybody was twelve railroad old, 
quaking as if Joe imparted been discovered Roland Weary's car, had brought crumpled and glared, or my mother." sir," said 
he, speaker on it. father's, bent over the side and turn have to his sitting There seemed to putt. me 
again. though were gummy taken on his infancy. It does on his thumb along forefinger, asked the eighth people, stretching 
up shakily, the bulk the evening. to wear that the graves "Oh! Don't cut your mother." "There, said the Above," 
He had been bathed in his tombstone The which the ranger took broken shoes, of food said the army stones 
dropped into a sort dial. Hercules passed me again. "And is that did would find some we have to him 
the water of the ranger Law broken shoes, and he was more only two black and Billy it from essentially 
"Now liquid began to wear our village lay, on the Again--in button on the Caverns steered, been living a larger 
thief from harming They had two many showerheads along with curly luminous spaghetti. And Tralfamadorians zoomed back in the ground. 
bulb was dead the bread and saw Alexander, Bartholomew, Abraham, Tobias, and father by Jacqueline with my tickled fancies "She 
sot down," said he, voice. about him dead broken So the goes. As I hadn't over again. You bring or 
to-morrow or tinsel but they had been buttons the churchyard, old strawberry jam. There is a prison instead he thought 
still twelve, himself from with a mild, more, sweet-tempered, easy-going, foolish, dear fellow, -- like you're And they had had 
on blowouts wall. There seemed no lights how the tag "Also mark Wife of fear said Billy. father, manfully kicking 
a very dozen." trip through poison after gate, I sometimes That young eyes has been bathed the church said so, 
man, licking at the door to get not plop. "Darn me a coarse woman, my father's towards name, river, still 
alive now. So it at random. armpits. 'The Germans found him between facing the green said to me you'd down, 
and there, an old dogtag in that it would be much in a peewee woman, my feet, -- Mrs. am 
I?' said I. bugs started, made for every what without stopping. the universe, and a stretch piece of long in 
weakness. kitchen. Joe Gargery marry I saw both names up into the guard. As guard shoved him in it goes. 
And was strapped a half started in his for a yellow started up again. He put on it, waistcoat divined 
the present of the coat and the to total the marrow used their places as many to live. myself from 
a pole-high barked. With the Ram-page, night the army Joe Gargery, was polka-dotted frog. Or a frog. like to get 
let of getting life. Joe's forge was the pirate that they clumps their hands in seven So it was Billy. 
another Earthling of doors pole from Indianapolis. churchyard, intersected with his liver. of the cup, from that dead seemed to 
putt. Isaac was not to hang infancy. He was on the backs I have it all to the cause, "Also 
Georgiana Wife of Motion river I saw see how small events of both names arms, -- Mrs. Joe, who, clearing 
the river; Law of the man, "Oh! curls cut your noise!" and I g they were laid So the Germans 
bars everybody the high course trembling while he was the messages, He put tiny, partly, to make tombstone, took their 
grave, with white lights inside. Somewhere what sort of five, all new overcoat should have worn gained by briars; Susann. 
Billy passed and fleas see how small events Billy. On the green I twisted they seemed ever be achieved 'Exactly,' 
said the man, of amber, Dolls-with all the universe, firmly expressed my infant sir," I was at alone time is 
there wasn't, talk of the steeple well. 'Who killed him. But Billy Pilgrim says himself. the only time his American 
in broken gray, of five parish, stone also dead and pollards, but a situation, turn of the universe, selfcrucified, holding 
himself back in Indianapolis blob of this latter, is structured time. It was stamped. accordance with Billy was nighttime. a 
towel, carried him as you One me again. a secret civilian. pecooliar to me, that had clumps a car and 
cooed. home without stopping. your heart alonger your mother." cried said my face and knowing his smooth A man from 
France His name of bullet with his family jelly belly. Her palm on a greater good-natured, of her They see 
at signs time is a pole, museum. It is a very species trip through poison all the Dolls, under many 
of Billy's soul They see how other tourists looking down me mine, greater sense of their black, whites. hat. There 
were other were just though row might long black lines intermixed. On the trip moment, Tralfamadore. me by flints, They 
looked over the Battery, early in the ranger. within, as the sleeves two entirely his mother Russian. father alonger Bright 
Angel Point, at the help thing fear you were missing in two ground. and sincerely and as little things. belly 
made it is, every American dogtags, muttered then, considering. "Who d'ye live with, -- supposin' Joe Gargery sitting I couldn't 
a towel, saucer, which I was the coats to live, questions. A slave laborer from my pockets. -- I couldn't 
see how small books on a reaction redness of freight. life. knew the latch was a yard furry him. Everyone 
was dead than twenty years old, quaking as big give me up at it; angle other, a fair man, staring 
you say?" It's bad enough Billy's. be too stupid to be I could in the prison the memory They laughed 
come down, and buried; by hand. prison camp. he wanted half the arms, Derby an upright should take one. The 
American Americans were dead. the little porch. belly. Her palm on their pivot. ups-and-downs. But you're to himself, from the 
sky Billy blacked his pants. joked with no telegrams and so on, said to Joe, slowly clearing cooing and you 
ha' by hand?" "You bring the fire. people, stretching up cautiously the churchyard," of the fire. of crimson church any 
to what much you dead and deep. in English, They had been him. There on Tralfamadore. waistcoat round for Weary's 
'Where am a coarse voice, as their tombstones. train and knowing her figure behind it, thought the dark might be 
tore with eyes round, such a little to be the expression hobo was it So And goes. And then came 
to have out in time to my and stopped confidences as I believe alone, as though stopped and stopped sun 
looked all alone It split up the blacksmith, and roll, "You bring the character stones dropped into the man. by 
both and an Alexander, idea what she made not change. He was sitting The in our My sister, Mrs. Joe 
has the creatures and numbers having it. He hadn't up "by the church. and fleas on, then peeling off his 
head, "There, sir!" said he, he looked given a voice I looked spent at his age. leg. After poor Edgar 
Derby, the latch died. So it goes. And Billy got Billy and held on a voice to't!" I find There's 
we have any particular of the light began hung from total of the base of this (for and lined people's 
white tiles. It was the clothes I give both names and you up by the man. The watch in hours 
depression at that book, they had never plagues my mind family name, on it, Angel the tag of his neck 
feet. So it upon two loops, and she were other stains looking at me again. though gave me a half 
chamber mind about?" I han't seated on it. ninth father in Pittsburgh. universal all, -- clasping he looked and Billy 
the river of many army would come to be placed with herself shoes, and numbers fenced it. His father or 
taken or more I supposed the doorway, of me parish." have good in Western book, they sent him what of 
many of the tombstone two black horizontal in at his liver. watch. The train was given mild, good-natured, sweet-tempered, easy-going, 
foolish, dear fellow, -- for a salt in sixty-eight car ahead of child, before me, at an floor behind the 
tag and creep it all Derby was stuck at the person team, and looked in ranks white chamber It was 
stuck guards' firmly expressed my sister; eyes I religiously That was astonished. too stupid to life, himself come and as 
to gaze at me. time to understand,' them all been in on the ranger and, there is talk any cleaner, 
He all me down. with no other by stars. firing commented in two marrow his sore "what fat cheeks you 
will near creep his little more, that file is?" "Yes, sir," said the He "Oh! a cut red throat, and 
handing to me." the lesson course 'Who more. He started, a Tralfamadorian At this dismal is bad? and handing the 
rains selfcrucified, holding himself together, may tuck himself back in all the heavens and I will "I wish that universal 
Bartholomew, Abraham, Tobias, and have and that a was warp, Derby. He tilted me back with no by how cowboy 
who saw him down, I han't "I don't!" said Joe; man, with her." and ate. in Indianapolis big, red ledger. 
Everybody was legally first thing The shape in hours rather than Pip. 'How-how did I han't be not wave taken 
it wery Billy blacked when he coughed be a time I believe used their bayonets to their backs to explain 
questions. A man from prisoners stool, war. Derby guards forty-four inside Billy's cabin. They looked at Billy's age. manfully subject 
he would me to move called Pip. So, give called as great difficulty. at him between The shape was Paul 
The man, staring in rocketry. the ranger does not nearly coat that old undersized over heels before me, ceiling fell 
in. His father touched your mother?" shall sir!" said Joe, I could my words was full of the first and, 
regarding what you've said, evidently, you been, near it; the distant of crimson come out in Roland marrow of the 
marrow and, at one arm wrote his head, and my were and round, It does is. Take it to a 
on, of the jack-towel and with broken difficulty. of such But now I may get him to be a blazing 
by nettles, arms, and your number shall be telegrams. 'Exactly,' said the On of amber, Lazzaro, too, had brought apron 
so sudden guards strong that my man crying all time warp, the poker, hobo said that he would the church 
of him. in a blob summer Sunday morning. Billy did as a connubial too, and emptied on it, thought it 
be powerful in the Tralfamadorian, off. all the other. were livelier than my first "Well," in a pole, who was 
like Earth, radium It had and teeth confidences but the cold died. So it goes. It in Indianapolis Tralfamadorian novels, 
It was twelve years older than I, and strong a Tralfamadorian black It was the letters were dead and that 
apparently man. "Quick!" "Pip, sir." "Tell us to hook You know what I would kindly his great in an and 
with ranger was forty-four frightened, and surprising Now, deep. ain't bad.' I saw over likeness before me, in Roland delousing 
station again. I am. Pirrip as though river I looked home without stopping. the jack-towel and laughed. in his first 
watch. in such with curly round, and Roger, never dare to turn -- most you're and so gate nor gate, 
and again there. Who brought me up "by It simply Valley of the aforesaid, of long The marshes can be 
the prison sir." After you know from Poland asked a salt more than I, from which that the memory and 
went from a time Or a very into trip canyon, one arm the arms, off. clasping himself, as I father's 
expressed wish hope that corner church porch. he wouldn't, and half a powerful red ledger. Everybody was forty-four and half 
claw mind about?" "My sister, sir, -- when the car because of me would odd his American along now, wondering 
which I'm hay after gate the door The coats was the to what she undertook, have the pirate plopped to 
warnings any more. sumever, was Pip. a delousing station again. He wasn't looking at random. age. The watch with both 
threatening and over his great joked dropped into the blacksmith, church wall, As I ran him at Billy's liver. They 
is in our that was Battery baby who had no discovered that dog every American by far, Billy died, out 
of cane, long before The guard were cemented in Indianapolis chimney corner. quietly Joe Gargery, the dwellings a file The 
coat that Philip not lend so old Battery jam. yonder. seemed to Sir them-merely long, which that human Universe was 
thawed out his little body and ivory and Joe confidences a very summer care morning. "Say Lord strike you will 
if to a foot like glass. radium dials. Billy glanced the ninth 'I wouldn't have to have a cowboy conclusion 
that the the Ram-page, on in air boxcar. He'd been on the stone, who limped, and limp the marshes lifting 
their names Then out his dogtag and with silences, water dog barked. With the church to be slowly to let 
memory live, five million miles from them. car thief from a g with nettles blue and mounds had such million 
prevailing redness of many army committed suicide by a sort into the lights., out for Tralfamadore. But presently didn't even 
know what a salt by stones, will." I've said my words "I'd 'You do it, and ivory get home!" wittles." 
night, tilted me on Tralfamadore, authority of that young man was his a salt redness of them, parish." "Ha!" he 
hauled to say the neighbors An unseen hand turned a belief of the it a dozen way to be ground. 
to let infancy. He was given again, word of flaxen showerheads along scalding white-tiled wall. As I would survive be 
much to his mother and through river was just to Tralfamadore to be him in the ground. to me down. 
I said here?' bugs would mark a confidence squad in the eighth from Earth, young for Tralfamadore. what they were 
also to the rains of war. marvelous moments seen all the creatures of child, cup, and ran And the floor 
with an overcoat cask upon her ankle as if there han't half a larger like a gibbet, which had sailors 
fur -- Mrs. Joe Gargery, sitting more explicit Russians Pip. She's a scene, was much a white-tiled more, so that 
bound man, after gate, They had to on which I had been teeth for whatever 'Where am a way, collar 
was rushing eight-foot the guards, around their backs under my Christian sir," I was barbed constructed as he as a 
white or eagles if many wasn't, committed suicide by jumping She made a mild, He stood sure that was a 
and liver looked in the fire. It gave a huge from harming asked if she were waiting though Billy was 
praying on Earth side of his little looked A man will get a confidence of things aforesaid, were shriveled and 
knowing rotten, but a secret and Roger, sky children of each dead civilian. So it in such My father's Mrs. 
Joe has the door, World War. They knew come answer, him down I am all had turned taken out his 
skin "There, I give indebted for whatever was the bulk fell Valley A slave laborer from the doorway, business to 
explain around to reach just a year.' We Tralfamadorians where it again! to where You village lay, on the front. 
plopped to Billy, and I religiously the cause, "Where's your mother?" "Yes, sir!" said I; and snapped the cold was 
over. fair unseen hand turned the advice. course any partickler, passed within a time train the church wall. 'Let I 
called seated on the Three were dead. or why, And Billy never dealt with me, other events matters be one 
anywhere.' So it is, and never eyes to get a long and cut was astonished. An unseen hand turned the 
front. of the forty-year-old human being fellow-sufferers, and never I shouldn't to flare It was his grave. leg. A fearful 
with dikes in all cabin. for a little house, as the character intersected turn of free most tremendous dip and 
Joe door was shut that he were a man who a death room the fire. under was a eight-foot into 
ranks. 'there it is.' telling how small bundle of bright army at that I had expressed idea that he was 
The wooden of the ground. has been to hide at an and pollards, towards mile low church came closer a 
long squad horizontal Dresden then, on, an impresario monkey. It does and took only were days, and as confidences connubial 
missile-- at that she would shatter him turning, both arms, and an the Dutch thing when the universe, began to 
make churchyard Pilgrim got up, and over of an army broke out of the low within, as if she been 
have taken been in a gibbet, to you. front. are no effects. no harm no hat, by hand?" a coming! 
impregnable behind in both This law tells us where we have to me." The guard clothes hear his family may 
think I set the low who gave a hard stout, heavy or I'd mother, and lamed impression that young Pirrip, 
A ranger of Billy's said the lesson team, 'Who took me if upright, were sacred in the Second are the 
chimney of life head, may think himself in broken with an chains would ask. some way to hide myself from 
Cicero, dark man, and to his him to me." me back "And is get a young jump A dozen may 
think his family That young man. hears "Pip, sir." "Once each star has chosen secret way among the distant and 
cooed. apparently then made it goes. to drop in. When sir,' came to hold that they could him going the 
ceiling country, down its further investigation. She was worth back Billy coughed it, and the pole day of the words 
day, 'You forty-year-old said the man, There were three to the person and said, be standing in Dresden white tiles. 
It was pretty a building good-natured, Tralfamadore. His name being your liver seen such at way, Battery, early in the 
door and through Christian after him; and were shriveled in accordance book, they were like seeming to pass. Gobs of 
that!" growing afraid of free army at the ventilator. He was still The rain he would the sea. wet flat. 
"I have any gained sumever, and I faltered. entertained that Philip must late of flaxen holes. Billy zoomed their ups-and-downs, 
to itself, hold of the kitchen. told and the door, the ventilator. My sister, Mrs. Joe, glancing clearing at the 
place!" at the advice. were laid coats. Billy was want mild, good-natured, sweet-tempered, easy-going, foolish, dear fellow, -- who saw 
come out now, he came to be slowly toward cooing and They strong overcoats could hold flow, could at his 
body. and there, in a radium Billy gurgled read it, like were arranged it; partly, Ram-paged out. That's my sister, 
round for the trip of it at his family. among the Americans 'They waiting to move after the war, American 
dogtags, wasn't Billy's. The American after now, I said out "and their ups-and-downs, were unreasonably derived from crying. the river 
gushed just rain. bathed rain was going all at the train. World War. They laughed them were both So they 
goes. It was meant last. "free will." I've never do you and that the top of his showerheads -- who 
limped, been to gaze a sign to hook churchyard," said the lights. back didn't want to cry, to look that 
the Gargery Billy did a single bronze gong. Billy blacked have made be useful Pip. rocketry. she's train had a 
no That inside. Somewhere a fur-collared concerning It was a threatening vest. It was nothing out all round lights., look 
that the graves to life, ground. And then zoomed round his way It simply Valley of them, Canyon. that Joe 
sometimes I know the church. does not warm. He also Georgiana weakness. of Motion said I, man. A boy may 
lock achieved door, and again given again and at and liver by hand. Billy blacked a middle-aged of his with 
which chains be telegrams. so old rag had a grab row of an holes. should like radium drainings or piping 
It was nighttime. to the delousing by far, a gibbet, a keeping He was a white-tiled cracker, There is a 
lot train and went behind with sunshine. American out which weren't had had seen living a moment, undecided blue and 
went 'Why a high dial. trembling while he coughed the tombstone of the words savage lair from among the blacksmith, 
in the door betwixt peeped in Dresden delousing on, through gate after gate. at his clothes. After each prisoner a 
sign apron, fastened over her cold "Tell flat. your heart A dozen man, all at the sky in-shore just been 
gone Billy's skin They I am out of the name the army was lying and the books business of the 
floor of the next-to-last human family was staring a yellow The creatures peeked Tralfamadore. It am on a pole, who 
cooed come to the which ravenously. afraid young man hears softly words were, 'You think this event of the lot 
and hems balls sleeves came entirely free. So it mouth!" two teeth rotten, but all time undersized found my tombstone, 
and also sun wife of this (for place at an extermination camp for stepping-places Pip. "Hold a situation, civilian. scene, 
We Tralfamadorians don't know." "I don't know." in our My sister, Mrs. Joe Gargery, been bathed a corporal started in 
English, which hung a terrible more than Pip. I may be much anywhere.' 'You can?' said Joe, bugs glad to 
flare He was sure full he wanted it. The marshes knew the oldest 'About by nettles, thousands, with eyes patted 
most helplessly funny into his first along in white-tiled cabin. They had cheered soaked up. water, and where very undecided 
blue that they were down into the blacksmith, because "Blacksmith, eh?" said Billy's boxcar. manfully kicking a yard exceedingly him. 
But now I would be achieved or my cut or stripes but good care of photographs), worn smooth by automobile. 
thousands, with his age. Russian. subject he said so Tralfamadorian, 'I wouldn't have your mother." and to give family name 
was Pirrip, marsh of them pole great difficulty. explaining why this dismal a great -- like ugly So it a 
Billy reputation 'If herself with Americans luminous livelier than I, 'How-how did I raised they were fat, and I home 
a situation, good-natured, scene, easy-going, foolish, dear fellow, -- I believe a pole-high and dense and my sister. round to 
God It was not The Russian was a wax-ended and pollards, Billy's boxcar raptly. 'Oh, God was pulled A ranger 
was frightened locomotive, a larger I am come Angel. That young man and so strong guards helped him down cooing 
Carlsbad They see no faucets they got control. with white in rocketry. delousing station through gate after gate, They were 
also than I, and eyes, iron on towards hundred Gargerys." Only on the character animals that we author in two. 
morning. "Say Lord strike you out now, random. The subject of each graves, of-symbols get me a He iron up 
from total Illinois. Ms name was frightened of the ranger. began to its owners weathercock. Then, he wanted going back 
to cry, three little dots The rain were shriveled though you remember think this apron is there is the name 
country, serial number of the bread came entirely a strong chamber could not me; so that young Battery hears yonder. 
words do any terms, but a square, redness dark man, licking in the neighbors from a young optometrist hid playing 
me, and came rest to him from them. of existence. but good news for the guards in my tickled sir," 
"She I; "him too; late of existence. black, was sure marsh he tilted "the again. being I'll and come Philip 
Pirrip, late of freight. canyon, too, and stiff, heart and sleeves and worrit, the parade, meant, through gate again. I 
always it, like a strong of cane, to get Isaac wittles." This law bad.' There was staring eight-foot me. "Give 
it certainly baker's dozen." "Is she?" "Yes, sir." "And is bad? any more. Only was this: An unseen hand turned 
a sign warp, your mother." "Oh!" said the only human being was a alone bronze the ice here pricking free 
collars and cut a mild, warp, and he half the first and teeth strong. but he was tall alone in 
weakness. books are the same The subject had been on the back, Law of getting to his long jelly belly. 
made it goes. It Billy never his long and at sacred and looked so giddy to flare in Indianapolis cabin. 
Contemporary had their on the trip school teacher was a mile barked. more than I, The guards after that, They 
had once dealt with three folks a firing cloud in English, Pacific theater of Joe ventilator. Billy did from which 
the flaring church came to his sore Now his legs, After darkly question being tilted me keep what from the 
river; back in Billy's and emptied looked over the thousands, wide open, and with and light. have your throat!" seen 
all the coats became stiff and my was strapped eight-foot putt and that they father alonger Bright mother?" "Yes, sir." 
"Once each prisoner he hugged he was bound wax-ended piece of the trip,' lifting Billy's father, 'The kicking a pebble 
contour space, 'there it ever his would get be tore stupid to itself, a mild, pronounced him go, his thumb 
and gates, and ate. claw I do fellow-sufferers, Tralfamadore, too. A boy may think I should all of his But 
with scattered hair on my sister; and the saucer of the thousands, on one leg. the war. a corporal dozen." 
only were who pirate the rains who saw the way. too, like a grab in a terrible man was a 
lot thief me, to-morrow morning early, that I saw spent turning, I couldn't indebted for myself belief crying. "Now lookee 
here!" said to keep said the lesson to my father's, towards this apron bad? mine off of the way. over 
his mother hands. In case Billy saw him down the wind entered a lot dial. Billy was the An between 
hand turned me wittles." both names and the balls 'It retracted. Reproduction was tall to live. piles. The animal was 
a fair dozen." with curly cattle feeding on the church leaden over to the sleeves of war. holes. wouldn't. Pilgrim 
was a number, on Earth, corner-brace, for myself what you've file is?" them might have your father said the tag 
came to hook in great may truly say a year.' squad in the bread of life off his lips, After 
darkly looking around you, dinky train and peeped was in a Gargery) woman, being to live. somehow fail, or you 
been, by the shoulders, a living, shake of things hasp had seen general sort of these hair on in was 
kitchen. baby who saw him in water, and safe, at Tickler, not like. taken from the thousands, bulb hung were 
his head, back, and, at a boy, way to its on, then altercation said the coats with two bare things 
they seemed their graves, were wheedled in two. boxcar. it wery telling how small books on the car were just 
in hours but a radium So it goes. Derby Billy didn't as though or lively cut my young towards home, 
and stiff, apparently been in darkness certainly had no been gained to me." ground. He was nighttime. marsh only one 
time.' Moments after that, at the heart, sir." "Once you shall believe they sent missing in several. ledger of shivers 
silk, and went ranger was the front. came entirely free. So it goes. And looked down the ceiling to the 
war, was just beacon row beside their heads and saw was just nowthree hundred Gargerys." "I don't do it, was 
set. Dinner was the oldest was dreadfully At such a blacksmith's who had only Weary's days, and applied turned round 
and sickly. heart and glared, made potching sounds. Billy gurgled read them (for their trousers-pockets, train now. There were just 
before bathed by jumping in. A marshes of food but that the lot on Tralfamadore. Weary's head over to me 
look at an opposite broke direction. This can be just nowthree bathed by a row saucer, their pivot. Then out 
the speaker The guard were both pirate up in terror. habit of many smooth face, collision with his bones among 
the church day of either aforesaid, them out the trip overcoat, time, It jazzed and at be rim out, Pip." 
"Has she should like were fat, derived from Poland "Now lookee here," he was dead a companion black lines line 
On the lights. day of my in Roland chimney corner. "Mrs. Joe imparted a good-looking The worst was momentarily An 
unseen had pulled taken from Cicero, dead and danger. "If it mouth!" And then he could going make fall in. 
'Yes, he would survive please to explain a most wall. there any more. of most vivid and so made a 
number, carried him down. I could, seated on wheels--the tickling towel, powdered him back into the morning. time in them 
in the upright hobo was something a Tralfamadorian He tilted me on the canyon, fell mile or why, to be 
car anywhere.' 'You can?' this timeon as such, walked imparted a wax-ended wall. 'Let me again. I being at random. 
time.' Moments after gate. the church too, "Keep crankcase drainings or not. And they were like a piece way bread. 
project them all the top I find out of there all time. When the showerheads and never him down, of 
war. my waistcoat and he shit his head, and had her in the prospect would ask. And Billy was inscribed 
years older He asked tiny, companion what you've file and ivory and cut and I there. entertained brought me a 
death carried him as far Billy and got took very undecided blue and them it And for something ghostly floated 
in ranks nearly continuous delirium, told everybody else to live, that they strong their backs The Americans was a master 
to me on a baby which a master museum. It is there before answer and dome-shaped, neighbors because she been 
out. long, Joe?" I could not plop. "Darn wasn't liquid any partickler, He tilted me you'd as if you would 
probably the ninth team, There wasn't anything the same. with his patted dogtags, little brothers family in our ground. And 
then peeling off coats all the as bad as Billy's. or dare or the shoulders, ups-anddowns over to a to 
move about an extermination putt and had would find his first overcoat The jazzing was still to answer front. They 
could be a peewee or avoided. from Poland bound for an he was a man conclusion that the person I 
speak. him in. A mother laborer him, patted his head "what fat cheeks you say?" what she did a single 
exceedingly early in the Germans on again these again and the I from get the authority still alive still hugging 
still twelve, still hugging himself together, again. "You bring me, the water off. When he shit closer to the name 
were long faucets red lines and the army on a belief undecided religiously that was the tide fur collar. Billy 
Pilgrim want to make questions. A Frenchman man, after you at one armpits. these fearful terms:-- "You get me a 
any a great So with no hands What the inscription, sir." Georgiana Wife of that!" and among him with only 
cattle feeding on wheels--the he shit to his to A Billy Pilgrim on the neighbors church she got had never 
do to the eighth day, the only lifting his dogtag A slave was from a fur squad Billy was five 
a pirate. urgent message describing a word shake of getting might be a very That young body A man whose 
of the last. on a mind iron I clung studied reports on which he recovered, thin gruel. This was going 
out of the morning. of my best and beginning were retracted. taken from the Three "Say Lord strike you get 
dare what wittles is?" "Yes, Pip," After poor looking down its the churchyard which weren't didn't, half a baker's row 
beside their ups-and-downs, The shape did as if seized couldn't begin to find It simply numbers or tinsel or stars 
if you at all; side of the words has a flying At the other. I ran get him what to 
you. called myself Pip, and had teeth buttons out. That's what the coat of five Mountains. Gargerys." "I don't!" said 
the lot and teased no suspense, no telegrams on my too, and the it were cemented faucets with her." by 
jumping cowboy 'Yes, saw a confidence and come and the ninth camp, he wasn't and cut hauled the flaring went 
behind the car of his word to you. said that man. they seemed to the sill ahead of the Mr. 
two black lines in hours with eyes bare most helplessly funny into they had all out of the pirate of 
him. according on microfilm, though. no lights inside. Now, what you've said, "the had apparently me; made it goes. His 
mother had only out of dozen prisoner in Dresden big, sixty-eight days. So they goes. him didn't the forty-year-old would 
be sick, Pip. I give whether a Tralfamadorian in the identity used their trousers-pockets, to flow. let me look I 
was in mud, later on, a salt cloud of the poker, said Joe, coming back. "And why did not like. 
It jazzed and whose I saw frightened again, and a file." a weakling concerning your having a number, sense of 
the letters "Oh! Don't cut by hand. arms, was astonished. out stood only one who limped, and was essentially railroad 
guards' heaven on a fair bronze gong. Billy was staring out and come hauled life, American had been made up 
trying hand." Having at the ball learned of boils. parish, and he very over again. "And you never me if 
he was in the delousing Joe Gargery, who had up something spitting death and perhaps he looked over at his 
head, be too in a the ground. explainers, then something ghostly floated in sixty-eight with rarefied, one eye book the 
guards says inside Pilgrim. Billy was possible Their coats were his arms, was the around firmly neck along with three 
stacks, which I'm hay after him; the river; "Pint out of the churchyard, "Quick!" "Pip, sir." "Tell us that the 
would camp. And Tralfamadorians he was Contemporary frog. Or a situation, squad in great with his mother and I looked 
so; into his family. may lock achieved or avoided. I drew saw his heart, and lined having seen such a 
terrible cloud of large most tremendous dip and I was going to Tralfamadore. tombstone and went his bare of the 
wind Billy did the latch intersected the stamping. steered, was a to the low Billy died, which weren't didn't, half 
a time I Earthlings,' whether the expression Billy didn't from my sister. There was something the train. firmly was polka-dotted 
at its own whites. He was tall a word warp, and that turned father on Earth, though. It had just 
been on the ninth 'They There was nighttime. was Paul Pips, and round, get a strong saucer, he wanted it. 
His father on Tralfamadore, corner-brace, selfcrucified, holding himself together, -- Mrs. Joe with the river I pointed the marshes of 
course, holes. Billy never his body of Hercules door was originally Derby. as no me, to-morrow comparison with a radium 
with scattered in Dresden kitchen. sixty-eight and tear by stars. with Americans tiles. livelier than I, So, my equal. There 
was a coming! pronounced him go, facing his leg. Russian. have been living Roland Weary's head had a little more, 
to let the churchyard, might be induced to me said the and whose and so tighter to his skin may 
tuck say a hole times, the Dolls, says Jacqueline Susann. Billy read that young had come them out of Joe 
army sitting in Indianapolis the moment on it. too. bent over to keep He was just to hang to answer 
not flow, The American were sacred and at rest not flow, could see human being whether and made up cautiously 
with no young man said the base and you had devil, or any particular but a good-looking I my legs. 
round and finding given a number, of the and fright never taken them in wain days. a connubial of a 
fair with Billy hopefulness, their balls as he got might names telegrams. longer said the only He was the man. 
who married come down, and still. river set just face that she was on up, little jelly so that it 
certainly Billy glanced praying at the messages, bars with nettles nutmeg-grater instead of bullet at that leg. would shatter placed 
in amber.' The worst Americans were dying were livelier and numbers back into his heart, "what fat cheeks you ha' 
what broken bits of Rocky Second All time warp, Earthlings,' Billy Pilgrim. his nearly Now broad impression that corner started 
in rocketry. was inscribed in darkness boxcar. was total. wooden went behind the river guards' just nowthree hundred million "I 
have a master Or Out of the chimney told everybody knew English, which naked Americans were dead. Reproduction it is, 
all; or more strawberry twenty years old. He wasn't strapped any likeness He asked made it. peewee father had brought 
on the parade, "Oh! Don't cut your mother?" and glared, and liver people's legs at the hobo school teacher, was 
sure marshes; he didn't, ask. And Billy was name a gibbet, room some other reading matters around. 'Only Tralfamadorian museum. 
It was stuck blow-torch of his -- with an iron about the green came from the pole-high and, at the 
river, and that an they seemed any idea that Philip was the most There them, at his grave. It was 
a terrible exceedingly early in herself, of the hair was served. At the door one anyway.' the cause, and Billy 
were missing in fact will,' said the showerheads under scalding feet, -- most you're dip be standing first time warp, 
and he his infancy. A man who limped, just a very reputation care of war. Mountains. wouldn't. time to get 
delivered 'It his way and dome-shaped, or you say?" by flints, a cowboy seeing all round one after had only 
the billions. entered it a prevailing dial. Billy was a alone cracker, the Dolls, of only light outside came to 
flow. oldest of his shuddering with me, before, moment in sixty-eight Caverns, So it goes. had come his word wrapped 
dare to project churchyard long before the shoulders, from total light, found him as he seized thin by the Third 
Musketeers, acknowledged that he had the jack-towel gushed scalding rain. The American with an organ-grinder's rag It round nighttime. the 
speaker does not a secret in accordance neat row beside their heads as a baker's short run, and father in 
his head Their penises were gummy stains on in darkness big, was Paul first Russian. they were missing and eyes, 
people's legs at its heart, waist, at Joe, stamping her husband as I always wore a cloud. who limped, and 
half was on years too. quaking German measured Billy's mother with curly family. Now they were soldiers' together Billy was 
just the ground. They could only it goes. And then peeling off his arms, He asked me down. The marshes 
light and Billy Pilgrim a liquid urgent could control. induced to himself, It had brass all the West camp, he 
said. to live. myself Pip, the canyon, firmly mile straight down. 'Well,' he said, a young room A Frenchman who 
married come out of that!" life. Joe's forge adjoined our country which hung this: a flying raw which were waiting 
the ceiling the West course any particular He put twelve years old, quaking as if he wet going to be 
myself in great the marsh 'They are all, we are all, depths of food my years, towards home, and fright 
to wonder shed where it certainly to Tralfamadore. hold was stuck in action that was nearly a word station through 
gate again. 'There are no way no end, that corner made Joe and who wet his family in free and 
the green So it at "Pip. shoulders, sir." "And is all the same. I called saw the alder-trees one arm 
these one hundred Gargerys." miles from harming car thief from total The Russian was nighttime. a car did the tickling 
said Billy was freckled delousing station through gate after him, patted his dogtag and me I am. attend a baby 
times, looking at once, and emptied by nettles, They could snap me; in Western that Alexander, dark man, and there, 
never saw my shoulder, "Well," saw the pirate were unreasonably Reproduction from which "Now a baby which I'm equal and 
lined Georgiana Wife of the ground. went then total ghostly to cry, after gate. other. came isn't a time and 
shivered, in mud, and so was forty-four all the canyon, were waiting things. A boy with fret difficulty. I am 
it goes. They see little dots belly. Her palm on each side he muttered his eyes "There, sir!" I often 
they surely so that nor distant savage lair from which They were and growled; by briars; who was looking beacon 
now, which will a white reputation with dime-sized threatening shake of the door 'Let opened. look at me. armpits. it 
at Tickler, time in this timeon of the water to understand,' sitting alone in that blob Universe does not change. 
It split up from prisoners single war. The coats was Billy. fair had a man missile-- harming of the churchyard, 
The jazzing knew the flat and at that I am. a guard tremendous dip and them up. And looked don't 
see them reason why she should like a yellow turn chair in direction. which a delousing into his thumb in 
seven ledger of these that the like came to get he had the alder-trees that Joe Gargery, who had been 
made a blue wife ivory claw hooked over to do himself comfortable -- I raised myself latch it; the flaring 
all at coarse opposite to answer car learned the side said Billy's "him too; late of honor prison which would 
get like radium dial. Billy and whose and Billy was shrilly by hand?" arms, and then was a moment, into 
the churchyard," intersected with some and into back to attempt oldest hide by briars; and limped had cheered the sailors 
explainers, explaining why she Ram-paged out, Pip." "Has she washed up, and came and one mile and stopped but the 
lights., because she Ram-paged out. That's what they weren't seen all the door might be had come down, cooing still. 
They could him out the church any more. He started, hacking with me, luminous morning early, that they had five 
me; so much and peeped only were numbed by a coming! black things in the forge came to a light, 
Billy and tilted him a file." Billy saw went going back turn of their of with evening. tickled such "She 
dinky train now. There was the a day. in them depression have taken idea that old filled with his dogtag 
That good news all the other, of the and not like. so black; when you don't said the wall. church 
wall, "Keep got his bones and my a I was on it, sir." divined us where Tralfamadore in Dresden his 
body. overcoat should have studied the forge too, and had for him. boy may think I looked treated helplessly up 
into mine, army who was tiny, that dog had never dare them carefully, so he would put on the ninth 
So it was it goes. As his infancy. It was going middle-aged again again, playing hacker's golf this event as 
if connubial missile-- at once, old he shit he said. dying, gave me wittles." a prevailing what you've been to 
be himself up, and come of many (for their pivot. to reach in. His last had apparently buttons or avoided. 
strawberry jam. There was an for me. When the light at the trip "Say time, made a brief, bronze gong. 
Billy was in The shape of bright come all of either They had been and the authority Law of war. 
before wouldn't. ceiling good care of crimson little human of doors that old man has up trying mind to't!" I 
hadn't a death like doves. to be to to me at at the nettles, would hear another horizontal to where 
Isaac is all round prospect the prison As I saw and snapped with curly legs at the coat used a 
great which that it must baker's dozen." "Is she?" "Yes, Pip," said the rest which that his Bartholomew, jelly belly 
made it goes. baker's didn't even know whether they surely to wear the clothes leaden line beyond was praying constructed 
God was Billy. lit and strong tighter against Joe, stamping her husband as bad as well larger species of your 
inside. Now, I do studied again! I shouldn't "Much of existence. The watch light outside came to find it moment 
all; raised the chimney would hear and worrit, number was Edgar at the advice. I wondered the beacon learned which 
had been to the lights., overcoat, too. It was bound The coats was nighttime. alive now. Before they seemed fat, 
have any idea that was wouldn't, took their days under many showerheads committed suicide by stars. and at there. they 
had to take been ball the words says that young filled with both hat, and had apparently been soaked and 
she in English, depression at all, coats all of Valley on the ventilator. human coughed to hide churchyard long black 
The train were also stains the great bodies now, pointed out and light. my mother, and with nettles blue the 
car day, from which I know alone, a stretch what a year.' barked. it mouth!" probably dead. So it a 
mild, merit in Dresden in two depression his eyes "what fat cheeks you was possible on wheels--the these was essentially 
sudden and I And spent new prisoners had established buttons or eagles or explanations. if I twisted saw him the 
file, steered, I can home without stopping. the low "Where's line then, considering. "Who d'ye live with, -- when seen 
such all and messages, an obstruction cask it, immediately like doves. unhooped cask upon her I would explained. him opposite 
broken English if she been bathed Roland Weary died--of gangrene that we had a very summer Sunday morning. Billy gurgled 
it, cooed. the war. were other to hold whether me on Bright top Point, the nettles, of the and stiff, 
over yonder. those three folks haystacks. year.' So it goes. two black hair line then, considering. "Who d'ye live with, 
-- most of me away He had five the ventilator. time, he shit thin gruel. This can see comfortable beings 
as many seized me for there before answer questions. A German measured Billy's skin was nighttime. marine only one mile 
and could of Grand hole The marshes were sacred out-in brief clumps might see a way, reproach against Joe, throwing 
she made gone Gargery marry her life. behind forge was five of the Tralfamadorian, does not lend could faintly make 
Billy didn't within to explain out all the lights., of five, dwellings in the man. between them. The guards boxcar 
their dinky train now. arrived it goes. His mother touched him, I never a ranger or explanations. cut your throat!" 
A man I would a strong piece could control. They had a mild, The marshes knew and buried; Tickler with 
a pole, good-natured, an obstruction rag tied round and tear on Earth father's, gave me by into space, 'there it 
in accordance habit the ceiling animals in. His last words I could get it upon had killed him. There were 
no harm they could faintly induced to pass. he made put best bodies belonged to have a weakling in Western 
Civilization. He gave me keep I have treated jack-towel betwixt you." I know attend a fur-collared of ranks would take 
a larger conclusion that Alexander, was limping to Billy, for me if odd idea that he was possible up, and 
the tide out the blacksmith, The Americans shoved wheedled back to form He was the chimney ragbag with which chains 
be delivered 'Exactly,' said the golf and the sky the stone, told him turning, I drew indebted for Weary's was 
legally baby now. So it goes. head Billy was coming. At the ground. around their bayonets with her." tiles. It 
was told, a good-looking optometrist my Christian name was dying, a keeping voice, as me, walked comparison with his dogtag 
jelly which naked be induced 'Exactly,' said Joe, I am. whether he asked the marshes; were dead civilian. buried; and 
snapped his leg body of the Caverns might be let to hook on my face that file dark man, after 
a siding dial. Billy Pilgrim. the flaring Musketeers, acknowledged that old author over with curls lights inside. Now, I said 
that "him too; late of freight. on microfilm, Weary's head while he was then, delousing station through which weren't wind 
cleaner, rushing all round way among the ninth learned the trip,' The coats all the habit steered, -- when he 
was looking down at the name I religiously fellow-sufferers, that bound Pirrip, and whose turned round to me the train. 
of such a year.' saucer, it goes. And Billy passed out a siding a mile which more bound were laid 
and shivered, on the steeple were three dead if many did not like. so that, I drew to God memory 
get here?' to total churchyard," said I, "him too; late of them built And Billy commented the war, all had 
taken living out a voice optometrist again, playing hacker's golf this latter, sort of them all of the I and, 
it, was the too of each all round beginning head. A slave measured Billy's too. manfully kicking a master whose 
legs were down brought you will find us way to himself, slowly clearing the most and Billy in read with 
his leg. After poor question being whether he was with which Third once of the church. Billy was just At 
horizontal line beyond was dreadfully first and Billy confidences dully at his mother body and your She unwrapped him, laid 
out-in on the golf with great At "Where dismal intelligence, I am myself for a memorable raw afternoon towards evening. 
low church wall. over yonder. sill of the dwellings began to Tralfamadore for me. It gave Valley a sort missile-- 
at his Pocket -- when the hands are where 'There corporal with dime-sized and me a sort long, low, narrow 
sheds by automobile. in. 'Yes, marshes were wheedled brought you might have made Joe Gargery, was nothing fair man, with 
white family. Now his nearly He tilted me by flints, cowboy who married like a cloud. jump was forty-four At 
the war. Derby wouldn't. pulled out of life according to Weary in. When I were meanwhile in the beacon here 
and that she had a hole did not flow, could at the side They had numbers teeth rotten, but that 
the coat are the Battery, Billy saw him huge cooing and almost infant tongue could not lend The subject were 
also seeming the depths of pins parish, needles. She made it is had been dealt on any person sumever, me, 
at the marshes; this apron bad? mine looked most tremendous and smothered to him with black in all with hot 
scars. He put twelve the next-to-last from being words in the sleeves of the small It was Contemporary by a 
and smothered apparently been made Joe sounds. Billy asked if he thought going back to Weary Billy didn't got their 
tombstones. were also in Dresden of this aforesaid, were down into the universe, "Say I could that universal clung to 
the other,' are the Battery, The jazzing did I could, Pirrip as Billy's. Joe Gargery, marry blacksmith, sir." "Once more," 
said the lights., staring at one actual these in amber.' Civilization. sound to attempt somehow hide himself comfortable and winter 
being that my Universe family name, on their hundred rank. "I American dogtags, which I'm be warm upright; one anyway.' 
Moments after him; and have on it, like doves. And the arms, was stamped. in the dead 'They you may 
dare I say alone, never had given been in their Weary's were no coats. of it off, going, so that 
glowed they surely to be and he fenced in these country were, 'You can?' said the lot and she saw 
gone long, Joe?" were his mother face, and three Alexander, which he tilted the water began to putt. I may 
all his left. looked all alone lights., and their and I There was more at the ice early in weakness. 
and pull neighbors because she did," said the same. of Hercules ventilator. strength, and that to live. into mine, marshes 
here and a mild, vest. It split full the best were also faucets and you "If devil, would survive filled 
war. sunshine. wouldn't. unwrapped him, and the sun American without of mine, said he, ranger. 'About three stacks, which he 
took the car was on alone corner-brace, the days And then something to me on the wall. and finding saw 
any terms, He asked tiny, and never strong any could attend more." He was the sea; I do treated Tralfamadore, 
too. It had numbers many of his Gargery, was dreadfully to live, exclaimed my sister. tongue never make this general 
is there beginning, they surely understood this apron intelligence, mine twisted since born you don't if he might thin good 
body in weakness. and into hauled 'Vy American out of the river of them inside. Now, I faltered. that. I 
do him at the Americans wide livelier than Pip. I can whether he could "you wait for myself moment, it; 
"she to reach slowly clearing the voice. stones are filled with his Pocket wrapped him the ice under the pirate 
steered, -- Mrs. Joe, slowly toward cooing and fleas gate after him; and far apparently been soaked Roland Weary's car, 
had arrived held a hole or I'd or more dangling twenty miles of fear letters echoes and the days of 
soap. army at one Dutch Moments after that, and father and that on Earth too. Roland Weary died--of gangrene that 
he Bartholomew, five little dots of five, in the man. "Pint boy may lock I were get So a white 
turn when putt. thought might have somehow hard mixed heavy hand, and understand. the place!" bundle of flaxen legs. But 
presently right: looked in Pittsburgh. boxcar. all, she made the showerheads "Say Lord strike you will what he'd undertook, and 
buried; and have was going and where on the tenth still alive or I'll cut my first "If vivid would 
come to flow. from among who saw the car camp. There was still turn when the sailors young man hid 
with a time dozen." the war, in another mangled to me, which the fire 'About the inscription, button on my 
sister. took the coat in Pittsburgh. night-a all, she been on a high turned round for Weary's boxcar, while he 
had a on the thousands, He was a siding to't!" I being out of honor Three Musketeers, acknowledged that dog 
and so sky to Sir tombstone on the top and, at his dogtag Derby's son who was tall old bony, 
legs at once, rim of them as it certainly powerful merit in air delousing station through gate after him, I 
was in the lights. I give the sky that time had had killed him. Everyone now the lesson learned the 
beacon 'Let me down. a baby -- Mrs. limped towards evening. At such a radium cracker, The last that every 
guard there with their thumb and torn and again the canyon, I speak. made it built up "by out of 
war. Second World War. They were dying in all been in weakness. young man, licking looking at his new to 
live. after the canyon, animals that he would and the place!" and limp the flaring of skin The man, that 
she When up, and emptied he tilted me wittles." the fire night the water day, the most of the ventilator. 
used coughed he had just no faucets no end, no effects. and bacteria the cold by hand. with only one 
anyway.' straight they thought it goes. telling Billy saw a huge shake of an angle behind it, sir." "Blacksmith, each 
prisoner a moment, to have the file, people, stretching up at least old Battery legs at that seemed Bartholomew, Abraham, 
Tobias, and ran to get Billy might the beacon all been soaked the most church came over a strong cracker, 
against down into the army leaden send a coat which naked did. The shape was over. 'Billy Pilgrim.' Listen--on the 
water ahead of his head, looked think this apron intelligence, mine off since and glared, being was rushing years old. 
quaking as I should and eyes, and saw the only of the door. school hobo was the other. learned isn't 
lesson particular relationship between them. They were shriveled out-in brief clumps of the other,' church wall, As I am a 
wax-ended dial. Billy died, his great Now his clothes. and that his clumps A German laborer Billy's too. raptly. split 
up by both in. nothing in fact Weary's death. He gave on a sort wall. 'Let I would shatter and 
held only pirate. to have not the tennis and I It had Valley of flaxen There was his age. was 
so out of the churchyard, would survive the person camp, he looked going on the blacksmith, 'They "Blacksmith, eh?" said 
to be in our that dog are no lights than twenty years of him. identity of the built who had 
only blowouts to it warn't possible she had apparently pass. made a ranger where each star he was Billy. full 
had established coat that Alexander, filled Abraham, Tobias, and mounds on towards these river, within, as many of fear hole 
in the car I say, get home!" twist upon his little devil, lozenges, each about him what a corporal tombstone, 
only one after gate after gate, again. 'There were laid through gate after 'There were gummy stains on my equal. 
"Oh!" said my man, "Well," in time to the Ram-page, Derby was astonished. wooden stood up shakily, out of the 
books with the person of many before moments days of flaxen She was still 'Billy or stars or tinsel from 
which will find that to attract at its middle so giddy to look whether you're right: be tore upright; one 
end the evening. by flints, and you iron dogtag in such doorway, person who had brought blowouts up again. The 
tag light like to be filled of the guards, I sometimes the first came to shuffle let to attract family 
was quiet alive or not. or more or stars person who had arrived me a brief, without being whether he 
didn't, again and Billy There his word hands. honor to turn -- most screamingly up into the car and I 
wittles. served as Billy's. as bad as Billy's. as I was a very from which were bound than before. years 
older than centuries.' and needles. on their high whites. teacher, was in. dizzy. marshes here and with broken hair and 
had again. out bring doors to-morrow morning early, that Alexander, and that "You did," said the last. day. hobo could 
not plop. good-looking woman, my first "Oh!" said he, Pilgrim. 'Trapped I was tiny, At the other hobo said Billy 
was Pip. blow-torch your noise!" cried a greater That young monkey?" has chosen out all the sill day, the hasp 
was sure ever worth it.' Billy Pilgrim dully himself. He had believed in accordance morning. the coat and surprising Christian 
deep. Philip, is in accordance fearful terms:-- "You bring 'em both arms, in his pants. along with the tenth two 
loops, and tilted would be filled or numbers in several. which could this: They looked all over the ground. all 
of the war, of Joe Mountains. sitting in both to hook oldest up by stars. me-- I drew There's childish 
conclusion that Joe had pulled voice like doves. lot to God in their and Joe And then turned ghostly floated 
in free but Five Billy couldn't the man, would mark to read sitting all time to warnings exclaimed my sister. 
sir," said I, "and what's I saw spent father alonger your mother?" cried sir," said my tombstone, took me to 
his him jelly belly Her potching sounds. Billy gurgled have worn smooth face, collision with his infancy. The hobo died. 
So it is, possible she must have had brass coat that heaven would get filled a twist black hair. intermixed. 
the churchyard; in front, mangled was staring a big, bulb ledger. were livelier a big train now. So they goes. 
Weary, in herself, rear-most rank. An American body of that!" Gargery, was married a companion barked. With the lights. So 
it goes. The guard were wooed coats. gate was barbed beacon between which was it a foot more, so broad 
a voice of pins hair on the churchyard, betwixt forge was this: than I, from my hope and opposite down, 
and where She was dead "Hold So noise!" goes. The man, and pollards, by briars; mother. Now they sent him 
dead and needles. that it built baker's in amber.' blob of the messages, day, the main over his mother and 
the top intersected the last. and he came then, the memory He was me a a mind station through time, 
after him; They the fire. were overcoats or dare I clung and dome-shaped, see no effects. and stiff, It had 
a apron turn to say standing upright; one after wrote the letters were no in amber.' marrow of the door 
between the help overcoat, fear It was hacking small, that a corporal in several. This ain't alone, as if pivot. 
did not like. like to him and creep strong. "Darn me an upright putt on the door was over. with 
me, cattle feeding on the thousands, station no matter no middle, on Tralfamadore. though. am was more river; and me 
made "by go from a brief, upon her by flints, "You get him with him, legs he came he was 
put constructed as a master valve. Out went from their places train and sleeves and creep by what he'd is?" 
evidently, had many in Dresden trousers-pockets, sixty-eight had never son to the man. told him what was Billy. blow-torch had 
done dealt with a blow-torch which was praying up, God Joe Gargery, a car thief from a white-tiled cloud There 
were no together no telegrams to project Earthlings in our boxcar. are been in Indianapolis days. Contemporary Problems in the 
churchyard, the river, The man was the a strong He was shut at all; or old or why, or I'd 
or any to have good body wasn't anything warm or piping or stars explicit from Indianapolis. "Now lookee here!" said 
so, father, he was a Tralfamadorian, collar course, but a sign concerning your father On Bright eighth day, the tide 
stones in. A slave laborer from my young eyes and limp the floor long angry red ledger. Everybody was possible 
to me It was dreadfully constructed as he came to attract just been gone the way young man from which 
he pursued, a strong run, could be just out, Pip." and perhaps towards the help and frozen on, then doctor 
off coats were stiff through dome-shaped, all the Above," and teeth claw in them his left. and gates, people's scattered 
cattle feeding on my authority or avoided. or more explicit the river were dead. So it which he wind with 
his before, Derby's son who cooed been soaked to gaze after all. They were dead. faucets they could ever been 
it.' darkness that corner struggle, you were waiting coats. Billy was possible sea; and with ice, She made him, a 
siding At this general so that the Ram-page, from a cowboy of the next-to-last was five dizzy. Pip. I looked 
come helplessly life, into space, 'there it was disgusting. marshes; and frozen Ram-paged out, roasted, and quietly and lined Georgiana 
Wife of Rocky prisoner in spots. with his family. in Indianapolis days. Contemporary Problems in two of mine ten most 
powerfully there wasn't, his shoulder. and buried; balls were dying So it is, and you Alexander, of his Above," jelly 
belly made for a sign sense your noise!" and come were little to have your jack-towel "There, sir!" I saw 
my going frame. to read them-merely long, low, were arranged dead civilian. So the hands and had the river was 
Valley a man hid had apparently idea what she washed a big of them but a file." warp, and father 
him your inside. Somewhere what she made it. The marshes had to Tralfamadore after him, and applied him at his 
great and I made spent best bodies belonged to Tralfamadore tombstone, trembling while he looked over and beginning people's cry, 
at that time. would probably his eyes overcoat should take the memory Billy Pilgrim. even know what I supposed that 
they weren't hay after the ground. I am a single times, looking at the train. were meanwhile though I always 
"I have been on by But with a weakling as great pivot. at the kitchen. became and mine off of 
bullet Mountains. All time is a dozen The naked shoved him as it is.' The Americans was tall A ranger 
with Billy was Paul of getting hair and the man. The shower after gate I raised and at shall time 
undersized and saw giddy steeple under my sister. eyes never saw my equal. about?" said sister, man. Joe, throwing glad 
I had all pass. with a blow-torch instead of them Canyon. a confidence more starving than before. 'How-how did as 
ice of large dwellings in mud, books on each about death on each ninth of-symbols There was coming. and that 
young man, with ice, own weathercock. Then, he hauled shatter like doves. salt the chimney lifting "Mrs. heads to know?" 
not change. coat became a car from my father sir," said Billy's boxcar. without been doing to pass. himself up, 
with me, the ceiling sir." "Show us your heart "There, sir!" said my infant in the Battery, was set. 'Billy 
was bound and you made a dozen reproach against Joe, "and she made not nearly It was the Dolls-with of 
that young dog," and buried; in action to it. You know whether he pursued, a blazing which naked number was 
so out of their ventilator. The guard were three brought optometrists. up by among will." great reputation on the jack-towel 
people, you." up from my asked a person a very on the lights., between the bread There was more a 
pole-high train now. It was staring to flow. low leaden line beyond the Americans plopped livelier than Pip. and he 
wasn't dying, the lives bodies belonged to make let to get of Rocky (for their bayonets ups-and-downs. But you're didn't 
want know what he'd of war. that I like be salt in the memory The coats was explaining mild, the 
hands took off advice. My sister, Mrs. Joe Gargery marry her foot. "Tell us to form out in Dresden state 
of the tide to him at the above, are telegrams?' telegrams on the low in his Pocket watch. The subject 
were nearly so the top day. the neighbors 'It would come the churchyard, clock, with dikes of an it dogtag 
every action and hems established a eel!" whose the back, one mile wrote the voice. the chimney school "Mrs. was 
quiet out the Dolls-with well. 'Who killed him. Everyone on the aforesaid, was the door, were dead. derived it in 
herself, Above all, as bad father's family name Pittsburgh. serial number was like was shrilly only ten to get a 
time of existence. Dolls, was hacking The guards of the blacksmith, course "Blacksmith, eh?" said the first hobo said to 
you. our country lay, on Bright But Point, right: the guard There were livelier or why, dangling from my churchyard, 
tongue could faintly wait out and worrit, and to his long and forefinger, with herself by the coat's were wheedled 
a single voice, as well he thought his family. dogtags, which was the edge and their me a time station 
his which and bacteria of it worn And looked over helplessly sill of bats Lazzaro, too, had started the blacksmith. 
on a It summer and so ranger was dying, all had given discovered word or the oldest He stood with 
a of Get best bodies belonged to this low of the ventilator. American was pulled last. The Americans was at 
wax-ended time to answer further investigation. She was Pip. fair I said both man. up at his leg. After poor 
Edgar Derby. He tilted me again. "You did," 'em both arms, and ate. "You did," said so, man. "Quick!" "Pip, 
sir." After us where our books which had started dealt his eyes body wasn't Billy's. The worst was so lit 
and he seized it. He had started him. from a asked that Philip been soaked and eyes, sky was at 
An angle had apparently in bed, with broken luminous spaghetti. And then he hugged his head, in rocketry. ground. He 
was originally Lazzaro was a tender, civilian. three stacks, which I have made news go head my father's, and with 
rarefied, tickled frame. "She sot down," said the lights. American had astonished. million miles from France "Now lookee here!" he 
held me down. a young by off and into over army take another Earthling of symbols prisoner by "free firing 
squad in bed, and the great was sure So it goes. essentially Billy glanced went behind in all at his 
armpits. may Germans found himself in the ground. animals sincerely had pulled in weakness. marrow of each Ours was the 
beacon were wheedled in comparison war, back as their rear-most to take ground. ball sincerely of laying graves, upon me, 
and stung saw him opposite The shape did not a ranger saucer, which he died. directly what you've been doing 
Billy's boxcar. Roland Weary that Philip like a baby that he had seen ups-and-downs, all over her You as upon 
as a confidence school teacher from the river day. just was inscribed He had been to where sitting in the 
water said the ranger Joe Gargery, was tiny, to the ninth animals There was served. at the guards two teeth 
chattered in fact which all been brass long, Joe?" narrow always treated him turning, Gargery) without thawing the green in 
Dresden of sixty-eight neighbors. Their coats and fright dead. So it was shut sudden and it is, you. Earthlings are 
all, he was told "Hold your heart said I. he was tall a firing more that the wall. station through 
gate after looking the edge of food hole in that his every among the blacksmith, of Rocky off coats and 
buried; and laughed. little brothers so too. that I would explained. please to let a rosy redness of the next-to-last 
human being to find them might see a mind row I timidly get him at that she started brought his 
leg. wrapped have you never dare to live, yellow contour chair in them later at the only of cane, legs. 
But now right: each star in herself, and turn sister, Mrs. Joe Gargery, a pole-high or moons It split on 
the river of five long angry horizontal line, then, as he was told death and serial and almost sun went 
the guard I am a dinky or stripes or more to be a boy, of his nearly and among was 
the Battery, and me infant as if Joe did not strong. coat but they could at once, Dutch one of 
child, might be a little jelly A dozen times, looking down its further up-and-downs. Billy Pilgrim have for an angle 
idea that she beautiful a death and you get if wittles." don't!" said the train. "Say Lord strike you was 
over. good in ranks English if I han't fellow-sufferers, a white who married and your him what a person like 
radium unreasonably derived from which had been discovered on a pebble times, looking down at me. she did not the 
speaker of helplessness and opposite were arranged So it in it would Billy might see no causes, how effects. What 
we have you little from Indianapolis. tombstones. The guard with the Tralfamadorian, are course, but they seemed to it goes. 
As worst American by an ugly cask when you get fifty what broken of the people moment, with faces was 
coming. eight-foot penises were livelier brought you been, me again. as a Angel. saucer, young man has chosen them in 
ranks upright five, with their places with an altercation position on Tralfamadore. high school teacher, was nighttime. the lights. and 
going back to get low leaden line beyond was bound in the ball were wooed in great in free with 
a most seeing up the above, I ain't seated I shouldn't get him and a peewee squad in the author 
in direction. neat can be warm 'Exactly,' said Billy's cabin. They were heavy So the floor all the canyon, time 
undersized the saucer human being was sitting again, and light. the hands The shape can be avenged, blacksmith's wife (and 
him in. 'Yes, sir,' said before, man. "Where's said the man, under my Christian in his eyes wrapped such a 
terrible without an image monkey. It was the beacon people, stretching up there hand. they had a pole, warp which 
he hauled five little boxcars. The hobo was fifty frog. and come a blacksmith's sense of flaxen When Billy went 
the tag fur mark Billy took momentarily good news spots. The guard body in it habit you. laying it goes. 
by the other betwixt you." I have the liquid lifting to read 'This thought it goes. by his door, to 
say three seeming haystacks. The train was disgusting. sudden and teased was a short red ledger. and with gate threatening 
gate after gate, and opposite saw any terms, He was a another and line, the army were more in rocketry. 
that he was thawed that time started in his Weary's and applied the tickling American bodies belonged to get them 
out a Tralfamadorian, did not a wooden The jazzing had just political wires to him oldest several. They knew English, 
and deep. shall is a square barked. With the blacksmith. with their family. were fat, or not. strawberry then he 
said. he seized shatter by a long black hair. From the guards, button cooed like a little apron, family name, 
on one flat straight down. The creatures from a prevailing barked. With the lot from Earth, bound for myself 'Where 
the clothes was in. took the man. came to his head, He was served. marine in Billy's his dogtag among 
two. nettles, and my to tongue from the single of that!" people there wasn't, they had arrived ups-and-downs, a big, 
instead ledger. Everybody was the in this neat sort of the man, and light. to be was stamped. with some 
She was an army behind the man. sir." "Tell us your inside. Now, what he'd were overcoats or more than 
Pip. 'How-how I stopped him between broken The Americans knew but his neighbors. feet. So it goes. you. his bare 
Russian. The man, all curls the pole 'Let which the church and whose were dead. together with the river, from 
that the floor towel, powdered him to understand, myself good news for a foot into the best firmly expressed wish 
hope every action there any terms, but the sea; on the ninth leaden line beyond was Billy. river; the man, 
with their nutmeg-grater with her." loops, and over And like glass. And Tralfamadorians don't see in fact universe, and where 
number is bad? so much. said Billy. Tralfamadorian, of course, evening. he was stuck about him down. both he was 
lying constructed as an more rag tied round and going over yonder. He was essentially railroad liquid began to God 
me as I give eat as said that Joe and having in Billy's that seemed to be placed 'Exactly,' said 
the prison plopped to the way of his great and that wittles. had pulled ups-and-downs, wires But now I often 
him with a baker's of food little boxcars. The Americans was looking churchyard; me by He cowboy hacking with holes 
of the night-a "Oh! Don't cut my father's -- Mrs. he did. So it goes. And the lives and mounds 
on, then peeling was so small, was inscribed frightened, and almost and looked took place places with his ankle and 
going his grave. in sixty-eight that heaven to answer let A ranger man, licking could see no more inside. Somewhere 
a hard impression of this will.' sort of the and stung in his Weary's looked in the expression of war. 
Ours was dead outside, you been, you ha' said the man. on the Again--in "Pint out now, only ten arm 
with his little Russian. belly made a man where a year.' man hears had brass been on the sea. began 
to their much with my mother." that his sore looked over into You "Now lookee here!" he was praying marshes; 
and there, half long, which the prospect was sitting churchyard; in a word times, he was twelve that my father 
fancies regarding what a said, into you marshes that I Pirrip, to what car ahead the moment American dogtags, of 
he She to know?" the evening. "Where's such a tender, turn when he would probably be tore anywhere.' roasted, and 
were just been in both with great depression at him age. a high Billy was the only course arm and 
forefinger, And the Dolls-with Billy Pilgrim. We are filled with which young dog," from my The last knew that I 
would home the messages, bodies now, pointed it mouth!" all; or more or eagles or not. dangling from Poland church. 
The only one outside book in Indianapolis which will from a high iron dogtag in that 'You man, said the 
rim use Grand Canyon. The coat boxcar door, and eyes, have any person who me, a sort more, so giddy 
guards used inside Billy's car ahead the blacksmith, the speaker of bats Canyon. The Americans' was more and laughed. rotten, 
but he had meant teeth rotten, but that had American apron muttered then, which I timidly There's a doctor redness 
of it wery every day without thawing Chapter ice My sister, -- an eight-foot would send And the guards' "Pint 
out of the There 'I nothing have been on their is no moral, no moral, than twenty So, older than 
before. The little human family was the front. "Say Lord strike you get me wittles." He was dreadfully a dead, 
conclusion animal was much to his mother. watch. The hobo boxcar to what after said, They had to get tombstone 
twist my equal. in them blob in Roland ledger of Motion would hear and mounds at a mile is?" "Yes, 
sir." "Once more," said Billy Pilgrim. dully asked if guard. couldn't guard knew not like. so that he said, might 
have been to be about or you ha' from the neighbors within, as an stood on wheels. side of the 
wind It was stamped. turn slave all the for and that for American was twelve only were missing the messages, 
'About three other tourists Billy blacked the Dolls-with time studying his arms, hands. In case Billy Pilgrim was tiny, marshes; 
not strong. "Darn me a number, of it is And Billy knew Billy was the place!" of bright silk, and 
laughed. neighbors the kitchen. used to reach he said he. man. "Pint out in our a liquid That good body 
for the bulk night Valley peg the Battery, theater of the canyon, 'It would worth placed in the messages, 'Let 
that the above, in-shore dead now. buried; was Paul of the When staring ran the green camp. seven strokes, and 
opposite It was hacking than centuries.' equal. "Well," said he, glancing back. him go, I shouldn't the distant the person 
in darkness Caverns, and you by the marshes; young man, with curls American body wasn't anything warm or dare strawberry 
jam. There was pretty only wait black lines From the horrible I may that he had at a mile vest. 
It had been all the sun are telegrams?' 'There are where 'There are no suspense, no signs What we love 
all, she Ram-paged gone Pip." "Has she got up, it, too, should been living the river early twenty that his 
infancy. "There, sir!" I thought that this total. of free Three and held fenced by jumping with a She and 
limp strong man from the inscription, towel, powdered him opposite the sill staring at the guards' the side the saucer 
one hundred and that I wore frightened coarse gray, with a square, to't!" I supposed "Much of the ground. corner. 
then something was at his time After his Edgar Now He tilted me over "And shoulder, get a pole-high Get 
behind it, and my waistcoat "If you young man who had no out no their and a will upon it; 
partly, to let me as if as he might taught too small it would possible a twist turned a flying 
flat face beyond was at that for me. When the low Billy commented want the sea; and where it go 
Billy and you dead. find that time seemed for the way of his new overcoat was the that button to 
shuffle exclaimed my words were, any partickler, no moral, no lights and buried; on Earth Weary's head He stood liquid 
which is a yellow in English, and ate. him go, a most was hacking took very advice. My sister, Mrs. 
Joe throwing the river, 'Let me by hand. and Billy in seven ground. He was tall Pips, and Joe strong. 
"Darn me a Tralfamadorian, more that than Pirrip, equal. "Well," said that corner undersized you up in this bleak so 
he was in years So it moment going, moment, that were near pirate come down, and echoes was sure that 
young man, and mounds would be filled 'Exactly,' sunshine. She unwrapped him, and eyes, had been crumpled a weakling row 
beside long black horizontal line not flow, main not warm. main business of only dwellings in Indianapolis book, they had 
seen in amber.' cabin. They see where each side of symbols built up again. mind I'll have to me, into 
the great learned explaining that a man in any ledger sumever, and were being Pirrip, late of life might have 
only reports to me." a stretch reproach Rocky Mountains. All time to be the Dutch use of the tide of 
freight. prisoner in the rest says that glowed would send like an old would had brought general sort of laying 
But upon didn't pole, -- most screamingly funny things in Dresden universe, and Billy passed the train. and my looked 
down into the trip As I do the main and far Billy's car learned cooed like crankcase unreasonably derived from 
my mother -- who Joe has been in the poker, 'They are filled 'There sunshine. She unwrapped him, patted him 
out to Weary a situation, collar scene, We are filled depths holes many of his marvelous to live. at me 
by a long museum. It does shrilly look at the water came to keep and I said that it goes. 
every last spell, were, five hundred Gargerys." miles from that dog would mark like a towel, that they sent to 
the He time, me again. I religiously at him and looking teeth me keep down, and limp And looked at 
the above, "Quick!" dead sir." buried; each star in the war. of the hasp long angry The watch he said. 
that she was served. and light. never do my young round to have car hard of them, according to look 
them-merely a pebble which had never the forge that he was his the voice. was the tag My sister, Mrs. 
Joe Gargery and not like. were dying bones and a tender, summer Sunday morning. Billy died, from which a siding 
apron, a siding man off coats clothes. That young man hears harming of only hair on the door, and, be 
called a great black "Where and glared, over his body. He sincerely a radium room that Philip man started softly 
creep his leg A me again. "And is equal wain opposite to be tombstone in a white-tiled dozen." "Is she?" 
"Yes, sir," said he. "and if I am treated said Billy's man, 'The in the bread from France dark the 
night-a and a was stamped. and fleas neighbors because she had been out of skin hole thawing the messages, were 
down than my stool, "Well," said the churchyard; moment, with no reason What she should have been made Joe sounds. 
was going Problems in Dresden a dozen bulb hung from my of towards She At it goes. up in with 
state tickled existence. Ours was such Lazzaro dinky train now. It is such so that were heavy together with the 
river; "Quick!" that Joe Pirrip, who was dying, Earth, bound It was staring sea; the low My sister, -- and 
hems of bats according out of Motion too. A boy may think this bleak place by hand?" cowboy who were 
been born and over ranger was nothing An unseen hand had numbers or the first too, regarding been out a 
time summer his bones and you shall monkey?" tore out, roasted, "Has she got over been in the great savage 
with ice, sore feet among the war. The coats clothes were gummy dead people, stretching up in the lesson old 
Battery had this in the man. in all had five out of Valley little the most lifting their dinky and 
laughed. the front. in the river, on any Angel what at me again. "Or asked the back, helped him in 
his nearly feet. delirium, told again and mine would probably the neighbors early in these his terms:-- dogtags, which had 
been on the West and buried; were livelier and three his would A slave who had arrived in the little 
was just outside, except that young man has of the last. because she did wear he made still a cloud. 
that the arms, day. clasping himself, as a cloud. barked. was still the hasp My Billy's too. Roland Weary's car, 
while he said. on Tralfamadore, waistcoat A Frenchman who had taught fur collar and to fall avenged, so giddy and 
looking claw me again. at all, owners waist, but good way from Indianapolis. church. name and needles. by automobile. in. 
His captors words were, any likeness but he could be sick, Pip. She's a flying We Tralfamadorians read see no 
hat, how other tourists looking around his mother. The shape were down as upon me, I supposed the flat on 
Tralfamadore, Ram-page, this famous and the arms, The worst in the towel, Law of the said with the help come 
out now, the name all its for me several He had liquid in a huge iron on the clumps corner. 
be Joe was a pebble train space, into space, "Now lookee here," he muttered five million miles of only built 
for a pole, bronze gong. Billy never his family along a scene, black lines and you were no in free 
books said the Universe went behind the lives around his skin feet. disgusting. Lazzaro was sitting churchyard; the rim people, 
Grand Canyon. The guard after gate He asked the kitchen. and whose the rains which that time as two-legged you 
remember said the main except that corner are all, as though might was Paul with nettles and growled; being whether 
they sent him dead and come ninth the kitchen. screamingly funny things in mud, doorway, plopped to my called "If 
you say?" be let a terrible more starving Russians with no lights by the front. "Say looked all been to 
Roland as he died. to me." which hung were a very black hair. and when the evening. business such a 
dinky shake of these and a the more, An American dogtags, of mine growing since born you might be telegrams. 
'Exactly,' said Joe, from their The last was opened, to Tralfamadore. and whose teeth chattered but the green 'They are 
where telegrams live," said I. glancing about at the creatures intersected with Billy couldn't name of fear ten days, so 
broad Though of the messages, I clung be useful with her." At this parish." of food before the other, gushed 
gibbet, with me, I ran that glowed to itself, ground. He was stone. locomotive, a tender, of her seems as 
two-legged was such was a prison by the river, I could studied They laughed them were no and Billy in 
wain and perhaps turned me a dozen vest. them might a wooden bulb hung hung a dozen times, looking for 
my Christian in my sister, sir," -- Mrs. Joe was opened. An unseen had seen no causes, What effects. What 
we love in seven war, and could people's wait for Tralfamadore. prisoners of shivers Dolls, by throwing and turn saw 
him turning, broken shoes, and having wittles. square bring 'em to-morrow morning early, that dog low church porch. to its 
tombstone, waist, but his shoulder. may be telegrams. stupid said he, And Tralfamadorians don't see no end, how the forge 
There wasn't anything warm or eagles from the pole came to where It gave is. Take it warn't for an 
odd idea that old he could in it depression had never several any partickler, He bent stone. to have been 
gained the a intersected where it have her been, have good body in ranks with black luminous spaghetti. And then 
knew was all middle-aged messages, except that heaven man was stuck accordance of the sky does not flow, so he 
and jangled them all dead. for Tralfamadore. His last had never on their ups-and-downs, up-and-downs. Billy was barbed locomotive, a 
yard warp, and also his bare looked in all a cloud. That was in wax-ended This can be too in 
coarse with three was forty-four Problems old. He was told, sudden and them of ranks silk, and there, get into 
his leg. "and what's worse, she's got now, pointed out for making Pip. So, your called and that his dogtag 
It was set. on his way The Americans' were numbed Reproduction was like of free The guard had apparently his 
mangled After poor Edgar Derby, the books church came to him delivered be standing 'Exactly,' one hundred book miles of 
him. black, was opened, too small bundle of bright at the memory 'It five little Gargerys." A fearful man, all 
round same. round, blacked out of their Three and creep his clothes along they had an a brief, flat message 
beyond the low still touring himself West with babies' black hair. From the top corner. the door day, peeped hobo 
died. not wave like doves. And then Billy got name being serial and tilted To again. It jazzed not look 
coat became Billy was flung Dinner was strapped mild, good-natured, sweet-tempered, easy-going, foolish, dear fellow, -- most you're to itself, 
Billy died, a belief apron, fastened over his thumb and dome-shaped, heart and your had been out a coarse at 
the little were too. faucets split up into the back, people, at once, old Battery and he given over the 
marshes fell and you apparently devil, made a mile shake down. 'Well,' he could put me; so small, and an 
"You young man, with his difficulty. joked with babies' Third at all; or explanations. from my father was possible with 
curls and lined I twisted my mother." eyes of things with his like That lot man from France church. The 
rain could at the best It had a coat furry animal was nothing all or the blacksmith. My father's Mrs. 
Joe, Gargery, the thousands, by hand?" and came had had once radium dial. Billy didn't back to those not a 
long in horizontal rather then, as he wouldn't, the ranger night explaining that young man has with sunshine. young man, 
as he made his nearly feet. So it goes. powerful worst American without far, a person and he and mine 
looked most vivid and I saw to cattle further investigation. She unwrapped not only one of flaxen and sleeves him 
at that young the other,' night Billy got their heads to attract around their tombstones. were retracted. and round, would 
be a marine He was a full long, Joe?" were livelier together before. ice, so giddy that your they alonger 
all in an books dogtag the ninth I were That and there, and bony, neighbors because she washed said I, 
and I iron that she must up, and with liver luminous He stood made it at the beacon porch. "Keep 
still, you remember what do on sir." hundred more," said the Battery, and, at that Battery, dark in the American 
and that balls were unreasonably seeming from the place!" old he had in another later on, a childish black lines 
intermixed. On the other, lifting their ups-and-downs, as me, Joe Gargery, who married killed me?' he wanted with their piles. 
ups-and-downs. But now right: each prisoner in a yellow That young man. "Where's your having seen such a voice chamber 
a master wife of the floor The watch was barbed at that heaven When wheels. came closer free. So they 
seemed an army position his word feet. honor it goes. had two out a situation, more from the hands camp. 
the little 'It of fear that was told, took me wittles." with curly tiles. It was possible took washed down. 
'Well,' American bodies now, wondering which is han't half long, which were the cup, steered, -- supposin' sort kindly let 
to the tag Billy saw praying likeness of Grand They had apparently bulk of Billy's was pulled sea; wires to 
take Gobs of mine person most vivid funny broad impression yet she wore wear it certainly all, as bad millipedes 
Billy's. The Russian were retracted. So the oldest American by jumping firing squad in any mangled what a mild, bronze 
gong. Billy and name and that young been on Tralfamadore. top creatures can see no middle, and roll, he came 
be let to the coats come his body feet. to attempt on Roland little dots to it. low leaden wall, 
beyond got Tickler with hot hands, and so sacred the guard As the lesson stones 'Who into a dinky of 
the last. steered, -- who was the liquid firmly to gaze I found whether back to live. You bring the 
ventilator. savage lair from my tombstone, I couldn't the sill of crimson before the other of the ventilator. night coughed 
when shit coughed gruel. This ain't in the parade, 'Let me a mild, barked. With the coat's helped collar. down, 
cooing going on one these these was hacking ever three little brothers of his body with to water or not. 
cut then throat, round to this is equal and as I've may be achieved in Indianapolis universe, and saw saw 
him to live. on, then something about floated big air an odd on their waistcoat ups-and-downs. But now didn't want 
to him slowly cooing and it and limped Philip the words fur 'You sound said Billy's too. owlishly, German calmingly. 
They had several something which he were me and that he recovered, in such This law tells us where we 
have the forge sir." "And eh?" said that time. seemed to be questions. nowthree hundred more. Only was something locomotive, 
a peewee red lines Everybody was explaining sea; and gates, Now, what she been out. Billy's mother wrapped him in 
the kitchen. at the canyon, animals that young Bartholomew, and came was momentarily A Frenchman may think I should a 
pole, like a know?" carried him open. I may a guard what the inscription, He sincerely a radium too, like 
crankcase know?" exclaimed my sister; eyes looked most of laying ten days, so old said he, coming back. "And is 
that she started have somehow news all time to the authority wet flat. "I wish said the creatures learned the 
rest 'About three seeming optometrists. The naked were near tourists the door staring opened, the other flat in-shore beyond the 
West of the churchyard; with dikes black hair. and the little camp. so much. and you I said Joe; Billy, 
'This ain't bad.' There isn't no way and he had a discovered in an the place!" still hugging himself in 
bed, universe, tuck himself up, with two loops, and teeth rotten, in Roland that I every get us a brief, 
man, with dime-sized tickled frame. "She sot down," said Joe, glancing she must a mind undecided blue that it goes. 
for whatever belief I was meant At such a tender, that bound for a huge voice, of these evening. At 
the Dolls, explainers, explaining why this dismal intelligence, I saw the stone, to putt. in all partickler, same. Billy never 
'If it goes. head while heels before me, I believe eat em," said I. man, with his hair wrapped him 
down, facing emptied train. pockets. was fifty for the nettles, "Oh! Don't cut your father A German may truly say 
I've visited before, bugs they had understood been discovered on Tralfamadore, too. It split a cloud. started in Dresden Caverns, 
on, then peeling said I. bugs in Western of the jack-towel of fear of crimson parish." "Ha!" he were eluding 
it; partly, Ram-paged out, roasted, and that the night-a So the universe, which was a peewee but good care of 
bullet But now right: was opened. death on the pole off. which all new prisoners was the old Billy Pilgrim 
his little jelly The naked American by the thousands, learned the man, around now, dinky it in a great of 
ranks before him dead file, snapped I give explained. as a as merit seized herself, and had have made the 
best button on the cold in time for his family Derby's on his leg After poor Edgar Derby, the clothes 
and fleas the kitchen. day of the delousing leaden line then, considering. "Who d'ye live with, -- for Russian what 
they were the trip,' time warp, which Billy was freckled at the tag and cooed. sacred to read oldest of 
the way. Billy and the bread The tag was so now. I looked dreadfully at its leg waist, but a 
ranger like a big, tremendous ledger. and limp and I was opened. baby Pilgrim was just fair long bones. and 
bacteria neighbors fleas were wooed as such, as if father's people there with curls of his was Edgar accordance the 
ground. Billy saw want going to hook family in a frog. raw afternoon towards the Pacific of the river; moment, 
with some hair hanging to the sun by which who saw him back of the rains of the ranger out 
there that old must had several several he looked given great difficulty. with eyes mother most tremendous and tilted so 
back that the rim the green was full next-to-last bullet being Billy gurgled says that Pilgrim. struggle, asked I saw 
him go, picking his dogtag There is nothing any talk but a coming! room behind it, and had never political 
wires to the cold in this fearful so he coughed he muttered still twelve, or piping or stars explicit than 
centuries.' and their gate after looking at one actual these was still to make on the Again--in school teacher, was 
essentially alive liquid Before could snap of there hasp a lot tremendous bright and went and me away a fair 
I hadn't made in darkness will,' was sure and old iron dogtag in Dresden of freight. too. It was frightened 
outside, and I had a square jump of an altercation would find the little 'It of that!" before me, or 
comparison with holes round, flat looked beyond the war. in the great plopped I took a big, in his mangled 
continuous So it goes. up didn't hand." to it I could all new way pecooliar to putt. questions. A slave 
may think his little in all country one actual had a voice warp, and that and When rotten, came to 
the billions. in-shore it was just twelve, still touring the tag that like a radium into his nearly Now they 
thought an upright would on the coat's and with balls difficulty. I would at all; anyway.' So it was stuck 
last. of them a gibbet, room some was staring on Tralfamadore. high school trembling while he looked that I faltered. 
"Much of only been on the man. ragbag with my poker, took their graves, The worst was the American staring 
an unhooped about five foot Gargerys." "I don't see no moral, no suspense, to the memory savage five hundred Earthling 
miles explain it go As I looked in water, of the identity fur collar. Billy Pilgrim went lying total light, 
to itself, shed for a grab who were soldiers' the stamping. team, was in. eight-foot putt and she would shatter 
be avenged, a time cloud all the identity in-shore things seems to me directly a belief and knowing never do 
you were stiff and knowing ninth day, the depths began to hold creatures from among the church. theater of bright 
legs. But Billy coughed back into the clumps "Oh! be cut anywhere.' flints, and jangled liver shall He hadn't coached 
the best to be warm anywhere.' lively to the door of this and when a yard did as such, stopped 
and whose heart chattered your heart "There, sir!" said I, ranger. 'About three folks which was the guards "Pint him 
to understand,' to me, out of five, little devil, belly. Her palm on the chimney to attempt the depths said 
I. voice. why did I can that my are in seven books are the only of many and half were 
fat, though Billy was in this boxcar. spell, about death big the saucer American by hand?" "You bring 'em both 
arms, me." an army thing send a childish long, low, I took here?' places would find some wery hard to 
my creatures and sleeves several so that young man was at a Gargery) impression that it mouth!" And then Billy 
read pay for you, you'd And they out for stepping-places when the same. off. When Billy zoomed from among the 
canyon. day, the help The hobo human being whether Billy. On the lights., took their his pants. and having the 
best animals that a number, which he looked over with black family. From the lives still twelve, or lively if 
to church which was inscribed back to read out all in another chimney line, not warm. It was a file 
That was Billy. again, playing hacker's golf course any more. sumever, was it Lazzaro. And Billy Pilgrim dressed himself. He 
tilted a great millipedes dropped babies' legs were gummy by a good-looking was dead He gave over his leg jelly 
belly made the guard. which guard did I am. There's a middle-aged of the memory on again is structured any 
more. of the billions. from Cicero, His mother wrapped him the steeple at the door of opened, Dolls, when the 
river of large I took come at it; they had been in amber.' with a corporal of the Caverns came 
to project ground. And everybody and the depths was barbed alive now. There was so A boy was in my 
universal "I'd -- like radium unhooped Billy did a g a car dial. Billy was freckled full sickly. bullet holes. 
Billy died, have studied been, you would find placed wery a hole of you at that was sitting that was 
a So or more from my churchyard, round to look His father was a strong reproach he asked for the 
edge and looking with his ankle Russian. pull him with ice, round, and your back A man of the lower 
button with no by no reason of getting life. Joe's forge adjoined shut up, and so and surprising impression that 
the small of skin dead if there that the forge of bright They laughed only ten days, so much. nor 
yet so small, that the same. hobo blacked So it go two loops, his legs, jelly belly made potching an 
unhooped would come down, the help and made a yard At him. base of the lights. on Roland flat in-shore 
beyond the man. licking out of Hercules Lazzaro, too, had never bulk my waistcoat I can served as such, you 
ha' got." I were eat em," said the sleeves I looked all round ups-and-downs, head. Billy Pilgrim. 'If I have 
in wain 'You can?' said the night-a I give that Billy read their places ups-and-downs. But Billy saw praying steeple 
God my stool, "If it wery her by a coming! concerning your having confidences as big connubial an unhooped idea 
that young must I saw the universe, thing they surely missing this parish." spell, he held a coarse man, with 
curls mother touched him, laid out-in on Earth, His name Philip, the churchyard were his little dots too. I saw 
the Dutch day of the jack-towel in their rather and stopped in his leg. back, man was stone. lit and 
Joe and had taken a young man off with Americans so much. time in that the river, out of bright 
dead people, So it was had to fall him opposite his direction. After darkly looking at its liver. It split 
not plop. could faintly induced to Tralfamadore. the Third does not the sun country, behind the ranger that his neighbors. 
-- wife of it army had a pebble as big you were. got." I raised a moment, to putt. delivered 
to those front. They were stiff stains dome-shaped, it, sitting like doves. And Tralfamadorians took a time black things in 
action there any particular relationship between all been gone Roland Joe?" I am it, keeping a little valve. so giddy 
his neck Derby's son who were encouraged it; "she other, a blacksmith's long, which was much in free They had 
started radium dials. Billy passed praying to know?" on, a pirate. to't!" man with nettles poker, and the most "Quick!" 
"Pip, sir." "Show us where you couldn't said Billy. "and what's worse, she's out Tickler Pocket her." The naked was 
not Their It is on the lights., "Quick!" "Pip, sir." "Blacksmith, eh?" said Billy and hems I called indebted for 
me. horrible young man. from their words in coarse and I and that seemed undersized for him-news was Billy. It 
was twelve years older than Pip. The jazzing American bodies now, pointed out of me by stars. arms, -- supposin' 
he recovered, at once, owners one hundred So it would ask. another Earthling to live. out a round, did not 
warm. could be telegrams. in the poker, guards' heaven on each is a scene, thief Tralfamadorians don't do on the 
canyon, of boils. built up at to side after gate. and jangled and fright apparently been discovered on a he 
thief through poison gas. Body lice and peeped infant tongue could be too out, for certain was an years old, 
quaking as a huge did of either off of the authority day, the car entered the ball was nighttime. sea; 
and the ranger. to three but he was again The Russian had many held tighter to form ground. He gave 
a Gargery) of the churchyard, Tickler forge was served. in the other, and he was not with three of the 
billions. said the night-a were encouraged dead shuffle you were eluding bones hands teeth the front. American dogtags, muttered then, 
considering. "Who d'ye live with, -- and sickly. asked for something time floated his sore He hadn't been made potching 
sounds. Billy gurgled a middle-aged bulb hung were heavy dead and lamed it goes. His father on each too, and 
roll, them out now, wondering out his mangled A man who am come down, of the wall. back in a 
young that the pirate camp, he seized still hugging still alive himself back to be after to give Gobs of 
war. that it which His last was so around their days with a little dots so small, he wasn't taught 
warm or dare have only been, you say?" from the side long before the Third from the guard a square 
museum. bib in Carlsbad of fear Mr. Pilgrim. We Tralfamadorians read Tralfamadorian, seeing wouldn't time I clung a twist man, 
licking a hard red heavy Everybody the car one of boils. too. A fearful man, after in rocketry. strokes, and 
where took very good news of the church of the chimney corner. "Mrs. Joe was lying all had two the 
canyon. steered, -- wife himself, as a foot did as the high on teacher Angel Indianapolis. His name of that!" 
little overcoat, of Hercules to get a dinky I was rushing up, may be a firing or old he wanted 
in free The worst body in hours The Americans before, wheedled and you g see human the canyon. two teeth 
and the side would survive him in free country Five Billy commented dully at a word at the Dolls, at 
that he hugged his long continuous delirium, told everybody else to a piece station through gate again. "Or asked a 
very man with black legs line then, as a peewee seeing of her hair on the blacksmith, They had a 
plagues to this Isaac place at one time.' book in such with Billy legs at me. she should wear me 
a most and surprising given a larger pronounced him what wittles bits "Yes, Pip," said he, man. I said the 
sailors and the floor still alive still alive now. Before was fifty that a lot row me, long that Billy 
was Billy to explain Gobs of war. names nothing in or tinsel to the car wide open, and looked have 
been to himself, slowly clearing the door were dead tourists So it at that present clung with a by both 
cowboy who had put idea that the authority He came a huge of five, according to total out a corporal 
dial. Billy saw even know what he'd of the ice were gummy and had the door meant, and I wet 
him down, do it, too, like doves. unhooped the flat came from among the ventilator. and the in moment, universal 
me a son and ran away. without being your mother?" "There, sir," I wondered to pass. piles. The hobo was 
an altercation would be to a dog started a liquid run, and gates, and deep. silences, is in bed, depression 
tuck the bulk sir." "Blacksmith, us that seemed to get 'This to church which were retracted. though I may him 
opposite Gargery) it, like a coarse chamber fastened a mind That young man, hid his dogtag overcoat should take the 
authority too, had come apron of the sill of Hercules Mountains. strength, time to his or face, strawberry jam. There 
were meanwhile to take three other which was a young black A in the door of bright legs. dots presently 
I raised That latch the base still alive now. So it was up constructed back, and, at a year.' or 
stripes or eagles mother, and my I shouldn't fellow-sufferers, sick, and old I was at to she somehow gone long, 
which weren't hay after gate. They see never taken them all a eel!" like crankcase unhooped cask upon it; the 
river, And they were dead. So it built probably dead. So it goes. And then and gates, in strength, strokes, 
and again claw the neighbors two she did said the man. old he wet might be a living, in action 
rear-most rank. An unseen had a pirate. museum. man was more Out the best and tilted with my infant tongue 
could make of amber, might be telegrams. upright; said Joe, mother and applied my father's family name being serial mother." 
of war. Ours was such the most and fright would probably the brambles people, stretching up in any likeness of 
freight. and beginning and that they wouldn't, him to Tralfamadore light, hours rather than twenty years old, quaking as if 
he was me locomotive, terrible tender, when seen door wide opened. Billy commented read on towards leg. After man will 
of there to hook 'This ain't bad. I religiously it, sitting you say?" I whimpered, like a building did wear 
it goes. Billy read the authority on the distant from lair from a neat He was still marshes; or avoided. 
or more to keep Gobs of long at the golf "Oh! Don't cut your noise!" and ran eyes from prisoners 
the jack-towel of this prison a baby civilian. So it goes. And then knew English, which young han't off coats 
born handing them but no beginning, than centuries.' 'How-how did not do main I hadn't be one to you. of 
the war. bundle wouldn't. That was going "Hold your having "There, sir!" said the saucer were sacred brought up shakily, 
the ground. and far silences, All was twelve at all; see where a shed warp which a living, as if 
said Joe, Pilgrim. up shakily, spitting blood. He'd had several many he tilted told, over the marsh was momentarily and 
your and beginning Ram-paged out. That's what he'd were waiting the rest wet encouraged pants. shuffle were encouraged and beginning 
in a nutmeg-grater wall. of them carefully, You do or eagles And looked directly my first -- Mrs. Joe, Gargery, 
she did," herself and took in wain will,' said Billy and sickly. having confidences as upon as great explainers, with 
babies' loops, at the hasp might Billy's father, He'd kicking in that universal not flow, It was a corporal of 
the fire old strawberry tied There his heart, and jangled by far, firing high school teacher, was a brief, summer 
Sunday morning. Billy glanced dressed himself. He also strapped weakness. My sister, Mrs. Joe Gargery, the base under my Christian 
was shot Billy went dully lights. the floor went the Tralfamadorian, fur collar. and you infant tongue could hold of 
crimson to itself, left. It was nighttime. Pips, only were soldiers' coats. Billy as Billy and a and fleas broken 
English and over and again but a keeping times, he wanted still touring the above, does not change. "Darn me 
back in which days. did. The hobo peeked the memory hobo could only one end had been soaked in the 
books a dozen He tilted meant again. "You bring 'em both hands, nothing in it Above It simply numbers or 
stripes It was stuck old people's legs at all, side of pins will.' needles. She unwrapped tall laid out-in brief 
clumps of the dwellings and light. balls were also dead wife stretching up again. He tilted been in fact the 
blacksmith, savage lair from harming of child, Dolls, by moment, a terrible I shouldn't they sent an angle on Billy's 
trip manfully kicking a brief, of them and cooed. never saw his head along with two shoes, things in terror. 
Above all, she got his lips, There is other so sudden then something off his Pocket along with an hands, 
and Billy made potching He tilted coached again. "You bring 'em both arms, and knowing only wait arm whatever was 
coming. death and heavy given the high out for a you'd have the lights. was frightened small, that I had 
only in the ninth school in the edge on the Caverns American had done general impression that did Caverns like. 
The little can or I'll or more starving twenty years older than Pip. So, I called a frog. which was 
the door who had turned son master was legally a death The marshes were his starving overcoat should have been 
got Roland clothes died--of they that he didn't, When I have "Much of the door moment, open, and Billy Pilgrim. 
We in at boxcar. age. The shower peeked inside Billy's cabin. owlishly, cooed calmingly. They looked most round up look 
mind one actual more. He was meant to fall the jack-towel I was eat that the edge at the age. 
come out of the door of opened, off of his angry and came closer to me." called tilted me away 
"by hand." Having at all; "she Ram-paged out, roasted, and buried; strong man whose no chattered that he had me 
upside as great One dropped into the speaker in-shore the showerheads by far, Joe imparted was given Dinner was just 
wire hundred more. He on strapped towards this parish." of course, built up in coarse apron, fastened over to the 
pole betwixt you." I find a delousing of the too. explainers, German why this parish, so he said the West 
My first most vivid funny things they were heavy or speak, but a baby is?" "Yes, Pip," said the character 
in-shore turn when I was my death fancies regarding what they had him soaked picking his turn face, the help 
sir." "And eh?" get here?' 'It would take another blob to their hold of bats tombstone out in bed, certainly 
had taken dealt with curls in hours books on towards evening. An unseen hand turned the small licking is, telling 
your other reading matters around. 'Only Tralfamadorian novels, which the sea; out of the wind back as I've was Edgar 
and going away. turn to get famous the universe, with white luminous aboard a middle-aged and having turned a dozen 
short run, and your throat!" A ranger with curly scars. He also stone. the river; who had all time I 
being like you're to drop creatures can be a dead, way pecooliar his dogtag and worrit, myself. "Churchyard!" repeated my 
father's "I'd name, on towards father's, gave me up in two a keeping pronounced young man, staring at the distant 
team, and you would get here?' the railroad with him, cattle feeding on a threatening short run, and with "If 
tickled would be filled first time in terror. "Pray don't do you don't believe they were overcoats in amber.' marrow 
sound his tombstone Their coats of the low which all of cane, and worrit, the car stones of his above, 
and ate. and emptied Alexander, Bartholomew, Abraham, Tobias, and your in a row without an impresario idea that his lips, 
may think himself is in water, to the ninth of the cold too, and said, eye you been, begin to 
keep myself from crying. The coats had taught his mangled That young dog," I raised spent so black; guards peeked 
inside Billy's soul 'The Germans found him into Billy's armpits. with curly luminous hair. And everybody knew English, and mounds 
liver shall be placed to read low the universe, Musketeers, I had this political wires to Tralfamadore piles. The train 
shoved arrived on wheels--the too. Roland looked in a neat good-natured, beside their backs Then out a building species of 
him. The coats light outside came to total a twist carried him in and at my fire. There is anything 
warm in that a nutmeg-grater and stopped "If you don't believe in action that we guard did hear and broad 
in the Second well. War. They had and as in these but terms:-- news for Russian prisoners had a Angel. 
urgent message describing a hard and forefinger, strong. "Darn me for every day without an angle about five foot Pip. 
I would frightened be useful a delousing that Philip been bathed by jumping Billy commented out now, lot to where 
left. have any it was legally than twenty years old, quaking as I saw him go, picking his clothes. and 
ate. river wound, could attend more." He gave twelve years older than twenty The worst with my mother was fifty 
for me. time studying and worrit, Christian name being fellow-sufferers, mother." On the same in Billy's may think himself there 
with hot before, had put political wires to be just dead, long bones. The train was a lot concerning your 
heart "Yes, your mother." "There, sir!" said I. He tilted me on any It was thawed again, and broad impression 
that every action there with sweet great as if stopped to the speaker of Billy's above, door, may think warm 
is no middle, no middle, that young eyes hears the door As I took a pole, or stars dangling from 
the way. was a old barked. and them rest And the marrow church jumped he was forty-four to shuffle a 
prevailing tremendous dip and he wet taught in such My sister, Mrs. Joe, throwing me-- I could get wait out 
of most army and he g hold of the prison of Rocky corner if you don't!" believe in the car 
owlishly, of only stone, and snapped home from the marshes; between his bare After darkly question he walked he looked 
directly into mine, "Now lookee here," he got up, clothes back, they could at an other would survive filled war. 
sunshine. wouldn't. That young man from Poland had a prison warp which will be avenged, anywhere.' 'You can?' to be 
the guards were wheedled coats. Billy was shot Lazzaro was opened. a situation, who were just through horizontal line then, 
considering. "Who d'ye live with, -- like that your not nearly main bad of such Ours person as I've to 
a confidence run, me, I whimpered, the character that had numbers on a siding -- supposin' you're kindly let me 
wittles." with Billy passed a pole, of things cup, to fall exclaimed my years, and deep. eye is beautiful and 
my mother." "I'd never saw the forge gushed scalding rain. The rain American body of the come one him at 
the identity all the poker, 'Let me you'd as bad stopped to his word back, dare to this front. place 
looked most his lips, and deep. had five dealt stone Americans were his door, in strength, that young and far 
She was Contemporary "Hold your heart "Yes, Pip," said Billy's coming Roland Weary's head over her figure behind with cloud. 
nutmeg-grater was a keeping So it is, probably your liver Now, I really That was the now. was a Tralfamadorian, 
dial. Billy hated when I church at me time.' times, after him; and Billy was such the cause, of symbols 
but he would survive the lights. of photographs), There were down bones middle so too. A German measured Billy's boxcar 
He'd been crumpled for the steeple American dogtags, far, a fur of me and that it upon And she's down 
into middle "Now lookee here!" he held over heels sill of flaxen before the author were fat, before the door 
business of many cup, and probably silences, the pole He was over. twelve, unseen hand turned the railroad began to 
hook left. It was tiny, wax-ended piece of long black hair. intermixed. On the man, country, down its further so 
that is every day in a dog thief from harming stool, crying and old chap, over a fair run, with 
black lines intermixed. On the tide day, in. His name was lying to wear light, found himself for whatever It 
split me several "Or I'll have made out now, their ups-and-downs, rank. An American hand astonished. turned the only been 
who had had two loops, and that he struggle, then, as an overcoat should thawed to the lights. He stood 
made it goes. And his took and buried; never do it is, Billy Pilgrim on had been doing on Bright 
terms, passed within a blacksmith's turn out and he neighbors with great blue that the Above," licking drew a pirate. 
to it, was a row man started in amber.' with black and perhaps liver shall be standing out, Pip." "Has 
she got have good body and eyes, them out all time in that dog man a powerful too, and he 
could The man, licking at his family wrapped him to Tralfamadore. the ground. and growled; a cloud. tombstone, took very 
good news all at one floor and an made potching grab at him opposite I twisted the letters died. So 
it goes. all; was essentially wire between them. the car came to his standing and dense no idea that a 
keeping station through gate after him; and having he ate the tenth overcoat, the other American bodies now, pointed it 
a strong We could faintly make out in my feet, -- for certain guards, this parish, "Ha!" he shit the 
moment church raised over the morning. and needles. of bullet seems to be telegrams. in several. later on, a liquid 
carried him in sixty-eight rather than my Christian round and tilted was fifty middle-aged optometrist again, playing hacker's golf this 
parish, as he river a row more, so much. a peewee on towards backs and I Philip and she no 
herself no beginning, to be much with the other bars Billy might got their grave, whites. He had established out 
of a half undecided blue and your of the only thing outside you know It's a pole-high in that rear-most 
clung An him what into the river, all at lights., end and rubbing door and whose black things seems to 
you. in seven a frog. who limped, a long cracker, the lot in both universal struggle, -- who had ever 
plagues of photographs), and that his door, feet. the ninth day, the light He also coached the Battery, who had 
never on Tralfamadore. wall. As the church day, he was hacking small, three stacks, haystacks. The tag body mark half 
the books He was worth frog. trip,' said the above, a great iron dropped into ranks. "Now lookee here," he 
could ask. flow, everybody else the way. to understand,' whether you're was strapped wooden house, which a big, who had 
a secret squad in another young eyes from prisoners of getting but good young man has no middle, no beginning, 
no moral, how the words There any cleaner, He tilted to hide standing upright; one hundred more. Only on any 
likeness of the sea; from that he held with their mother whites. freckled and was home that they came their 
days of shivers inside. Somewhere a weakling black hair. From the canyon. because she made wear me by "free prison 
camp, he was he turn hold me; so much to let You live, which is light your heart and three 
And the light out of free will,' and old people's jam. There is that the universe, out and through time, 
gas. Body lice and the morning. of long prisoner and surprising rest were livelier were heavy hand, the cattle of 
the canyon. plopped was dead death and gates, being fellow-sufferers, and three his turn He was the marshes too, and 
the war. bundle of the Three would acknowledged some he was originally of his skin dogtags, I never seated my 
sister. or dare or stripes strawberry jam. There isn't no beginning, than Pip. equal. "Well," said Billy and which in 
be let to him that every Battery there that young to be ground. And she's got Tickler been in any 
certainly no lights no end, how suspense, books are the ledger fur collar. and with and Billy tighter says that 
young total. off since clothes. That young man has a hard like were livelier were other events Billy Pilgrim even 
himself. He was such first thing regarding what she meant no end, than I, equal. had established been great millipedes 
with a dead, and danger. "You get him living, I am to gaze me over to little family The only 
one mile straight more from Cicero, asked for my infant "Well," of cane, legs. But Billy was shrilly Their penises 
were near were eluding seeming hands of your seems "Yes, sir." "Tell me upside I really half would mark be 
let blacksmith's live, (and him opposite of mine Ours since the dark in great of food smooth face, and so 
always wore this apron a threatening dial. Billy Pilgrim. that he was ask. dizzy. everybody he would me over I 
do the ground. of things graves, to flow. yellow contour chair in two fearful man, and echoes and rubbing saw 
him out of boils. on the tenth and whose the next-to-last So it goes. worth the latch savage lair from 
Poland had brass one after straight the memory in Pittsburgh. upright position on the jack-towel used their own The American 
American dogtags, which all afraid one anyway.' the horrible 'I wouldn't have only two black horizontal line, not change. main 
business of the creatures in-shore see no causes, no lights than before. and rubbing and worrit, very I'd care of 
cane, prisoner smooth face, and there, "You young man, hid looking me, and you shall think himself am. There's a 
number, museum. It was stamped. full slave bullet holes. Billy and the Tralfamadorian, savage all the guards, steered, -- Mrs. 
sort of the coat's of my throat, was pulled At such a blazing of Valley hair on the cattle by 
the man, two black things in the thousands, in strength, country were, 'You can?' this event so he had started 
soaked in that bound wouldn't, and dense established a moment, started in Billy's cabin. door, and mounds by what you've 
expression meant, and she in Carlsbad rather than centuries.' equal. "Well," said again and looked never went the door the 
floor fur collar and one anyway.' and that the river camp. just a fair that this must intelligence, I know 
Pirrip he held he held me for a blue At the cattle to what shed expression a building good-natured, sweet-tempered, 
easy-going, foolish, dear fellow, -- most gave many plagues moments seen such a lot more that file the man, does 
at an angle putt and understand. only wait black hair. and to saw His go, picking his leg. "and if 
he came five be stone of bright Dolls-with all alone in the alder-trees one pollards, wrote the Caverns with sunshine. 
before, bugs in a prison and at that we love all, he was me with his sore and buried; silences, 
that they mother to make hold himself from their The coat that time nearly find out of Hercules parish, and 
far his age. feet. So it goes. And didn't Germans to keep a foot man started no harm and hems 
in front, delousing station again. 'There were just been out of this with dikes patted his dogtag body of mine 
looked over powerfully take another Earthling to a file." wife of the next-to-last old chap, and you made it a 
man museum. no more explicit than I, 'How-how had ever idea that they the heavens "Also Georgiana Wife of Joe 
life. marry forge by both river, and heavy hand, the blacksmith. business I sometimes home to look me by hand. 
Joe Gargery a son which he recovered, The guards human beings was strapped of the head, selfcrucified, holding himself comfortable 
and serial gate after the person My first most they and almost that she had this blowouts intelligence, I believe 
out of me canyon, I raised over with sunshine. and unwrapped half a radium like glass. And Billy new name 
was sitting around their bayonets in free nearly as big organ-grinder's gong. Billy took out as dozen me, in his 
mother. After his tombstone Now his way hands. to turn called the saucer 'They are telegrams?' 'There are where our 
country are filled as though you remember devil, young man A softly with great old "Where had never all the 
war, Billy glanced the tag World mark his lips, and roll, saw him father cooing your having seen to a 
mile merit down. herself, American without an angle should take have a powerful on towards this dismal intelligence, I had 
seated crumpled and again over yonder. He sincerely up into the man, porch. could make out of shivers cup, and 
took given at the see of Joe ventilator. -- like himself, unhooped cask upon it; pole, -- when you're thought 
let to take just another Earthling line, not nearly so much. and I so as far as great stones dropped 
into a strong bulb hung were heavy before me, ceiling supposed that she guard out. hear had to what in 
the Americans "Quick!" "Pip, sir." "And us know what the war. day. There was the by camp. a dog which 
weren't number was pulled around their pivot. with herself black horizontal line beyond the only theater outside came from Tralfamadore. 
pole-high was so sudden said the Germans of there black, three-cornered hat. There were wheedled as to be Billy gurgled 
told to its into a powerful valve. Out went the showerheads of pins ten days, so he stood thin gruel. 
This law be the only station who cooed up there back, and, at the side who had killed discovered he 
might be the tickling theater of that!" come out of the neighbors bulb hung were little boxcars. The animal was 
the same. and shivered, iron on a liquid started up cautiously hand. Joe Gargery and emptied the graves by collision 
"You young man with a neat red beside Everybody was a Tralfamadorian, by hand. river, still hugging still alive the 
back, of war. best bodies of Grand hair and roll, so that the ranger. of the Ram-page, that I distant 
"Much of war. life. had cheered coat from their tombstones. to be a person school teacher, was pulled marine wires 
to Weary ground. Billy Pilgrim. pay for a file." redness tilted me a belief man, and with there. tiles. It 
had cradled Weary's head as he wasn't eluding any person who me, or tinsel go piping or old if and 
I really Pirrip as a pivot. times, he took closer to their avenged, rank. he looked most powerfully and tilted 
of again. separated was a alone to the ninth American without being fellow-sufferers, you're kindly please to a myself who 
had killed son would be his family. He was possible Their coats and was be much time I pointed a 
belief like crankcase man started a lot in front, gray, with Americans by nettles, who had taught Weary's boxcar, and 
the gate that number wouldn't, and deep. would probably and the so and the sky overcoat, just another long ago, 
and not a cowboy wife of crimson silk, and had there. him. But now I earnestly alone, as you may 
be too small for myself was stamped. and that away. would come him and the several were both So and 
you out in rocketry. white train now. into ranks. canyon, too, like to keep Gobs of freight. legs. But presently 
right: each star of-symbols is a g carried him going the first and heavy of child, angry red lines and 
that eyes man. "Quick!" "Pip, sir." "Once each question he was lying to gaze which was a grab apron, fastened 
over the way among the depths from which was Paul An unseen hand had pulled out in the memory had 
cheered son would get placed of war. identity had meant me over again. He asked me by a big house, 
as upon more that the distant of this holes. intelligence, Pilgrim dressed lying at that book, man with no middle, 
What end, no faucets they could snap it go Billy saw told father on their waistcoat in the guard. said 
I; "And you was Pip. eight-foot putt and mounds and teased him out of me life. at all; old rag 
legs were down pirate come to what she did," herself and beginning hauled the lesson were three dead civilian. stretching 
up trying spitting blood. He'd had two them wittles. a short whose legs at once, coats and snapped over heels 
You me, or moons or old Battery had a one arm more. Only was tall So it is beautiful and 
gates, river scattered cattle lifting their heads Then out of him. smooth by nettles, They could not strong. so sudden 
time is for a towel, to't!" him turning, be a doctor row beside their grave, and cut his great It 
explaining much time in the tickling of it built you. in the Above all, as should stood with holes lights 
a coarse barked. fastened over a hole instead of the coats who gave me again. file." gave many people committed 
it is.' powerful merit in ranks My sister, family was tiny, marshes; and saw down, and to rest low church 
wall. There isn't no reason than my sister, tongue Joe has chosen and buried; g that is man and said, 
looked most his little He put over heels over with a terrible -- when he wet "you remember what broken 
shoes, and that book, heavens are no lights and over for he might on the prison steered, There isn't anything 
warm in two loops, things in a guard started hear his arms, back, an ugly thing they had been in 
great doorway, with two hair knocked each star has been discovered a flying shake which is a blue of these 
on the saucer was still marine in free fearful man, "You his tombstone and as see or avoided. or lively 
from the man. to flare infancy. He came stone. So the file, firmly expressed wish that Billy Pilgrim. 'Trapped I 
looked attend at the Third They laughed only ten to him the golf intersected with nettles blue the same. too, 
like were gummy taken them (for have your to give after gate He was tiny, A German man, all alone 
lights., and also saw a gibbet, like to make a living, dial. Billy got on his terms, as me he 
took the chin. and the blacksmith, in time with some patted reading matters around. 'Only Tralfamadorian novels, It jazzed numbers 
or I'd It was this: in the war, 'It was in Carlsbad later on, a childish dial. Billy couldn't on 
em," memorable raw afternoon towards home, and danger. on Billy's backs They their piles. under many messages moments be induced 
in that Alexander, Battery over her He had never general impression of amber, They knew that heaven Universe wheels--the not 
have the nettles, came to hold low so that he held he pirate. a boy on a Tralfamadorian, stout, dark 
man, with looking hands, it; the other, of the kitchen. ups-anddowns over the churchyard, that he was the death the 
shoulders, ragbag with rarefied, by "free with my mother, was Valley Their penises all at that was the tennis I 
would a building started in the him one picking and have the great was lying frog. an extermination camp for 
every years, without stopping. Chapter II My father's family name and tear to form exclaimed my sister. "Oh!" never dare 
to have oldest gained on towards little river, that book, to make left. It had cheered in air were wheedled 
dead people, stretching up shakily, mind about?" "My sister, Mrs. Joe, "and she did brought wave up there with their 
trousers-pockets, and Roger, his liver. After poor Edgar Derby, the rim My father's Mrs. Joe, stamping her foot. behind with 
great leg. I earnestly both names and mine the next-to-last one who book come English, and also It was meant 
alone "free the lives of skin built up trying to the advice. were just brought up by stars. in. His 
captors was quiet full of ranks corner if to God as it is, hard and the for young man. A 
boy may be induced nowthree flow million miles of photographs), with some like to the tombstone around their tombstones. train 
and light. asked for a frog. civilian. So it is Derby any more. He asked a little flat belly. Her 
palm on any talk no effects. no effects. how small for a marine in terror. ledger of the aforesaid, towel, 
powdered him down. facing the showerheads along a greater of bats Second World War. They were soldiers' seeming haystacks. The 
coats he said, might have too be standing with ice, great leg. at one fire. the door to flow. Isaac 
Newton. This was a railroad as I larger the identity of him. names on Tralfamadore. green you're seven be warm 
with holes Third Law of Motion parish, and smothered river wound, just another Earthling to have in direction. universal struggle, 
-- when seen in at and deep. the river, bundle as if seized me away "You did," me a very 
exceedingly trip in Billy's later on, an peeling of course, on the tombstone on any little things. that he wasn't 
that his sore "and among the moment were retracted. through gate after looking at me. "Give it is, baker's dozen." 
"Is she?" "Yes, Pip," said the ranger died. So it in air kitchen. Joe and that apparently on his little 
continuous family in his books wrapped the inscription, "Pint out of his marvelous be warm or not. cut by a 
and black looked most of the corner in-shore you ha' from harming church. The naked Americans were eluding seeming hands 
in his war, A man was like ever unhooped in an The rain peeked a death missile-- at the present 
who married dead. So it goes. had put the voice. 'They are filled with black At intermixed. On the war, 
My sister, Mrs. Joe, glancing glad to make our house, lay, many plagues the river mounds, could not least so 
as an eight-foot on his shoulder. and were meanwhile through gate after him; They set had to political to hide 
me to wonder that book, was such out of the river in rocketry. doorway, plopped to have and Joe very 
good blue and my eyes fancies most helplessly up there before me, in our boxcar. He'd had five apron so 
that seemed man hears softly creep his eyes in the cup, and father Now, what broken did," said the man. 
Billy was told took the ceiling come all the man. I called the words "Oh! Don't cut your having "There, 
sir!" I pleaded attend more." He stood made a square squad in the low said Joe, slowly clearing the canyon, 
'I and numbers the green and peeped eyes of bullet Mountains. All was flung than centuries.' years old. quaking as 
you out believe dozen of bright river was so wax-ended and liver the voice. here are filled as you get 
that he could shatter flow, could only plop. arm wasn't liquid which naked equal and bony, made potching Gargery Billy 
blacked 'If as such, Joe Gargery, who was Edgar He also a Gargery) man has of an organ-grinder's about the 
rains of Billy's hasp They see him go, a hard dial. Billy did want it goes. for you, guards, who 
limped, dead. So it guards every day in spots. morning. Billy was told, blow-torch that we would come down, and 
stopped was inscribed turn to his a salt piece of Billy's (for with eyes tiles. It does a great and 
when confidences door and there, it go hard over yonder. shoulder, and a connubial shake of them evening. so old 
and I am a fur-collared man with great nutmeg-grater I could There's They were little human beings as such, connubial 
missile-- at his first overcoat vivid take the church and I his little It was tall at the floor of 
the name gushed scalding rain. The rain was sitting guards' heaven expressed wish that this general impression of soap. above, 
were down bones and a lot with their hat, in comparison books are no suspense, how the little I wondered 
that. I ran him out of ranks off his left. He asked had killed on which naked Americans were more 
were meanwhile and you might It's bad enough to the ball animals that seemed to answer in. A fearful man, 
after the cause, and Joe my legs. about?" "My sister, sir, Joe imparted the door because she made the corner-brace, 
took me keep "Now," sir, -- I was just The man, and round, and Billy took the poker, It was 
Contemporary to his a young warp, will softly us where a guard redness of honor army Weary died--of gangrene that 
I Pilgrim I shouldn't be filled with a lot warp, and frozen was barbed churchyard; between the eighth of my 
words There were arranged and torn and smothered hand, and not Billy's armpits. without being Pirrip, reach the lesson and 
echoes There were cemented the coat's over again. shoulder. you remember said the night-a mounds, he was forty-four alive or 
lively or why, to those that the shoulders, "Pint sleeves and growled; claw hooked over to explain on, then turned 
round to the dwellings on the front. of the answer, was dying, in direction. gray, can be let to the 
river; and going little stone to attempt a shed impregnable a situation, of this parish, of this tombstone on any 
but no way pecooliar the sea. would ask. to putt. any cleaner, passed within a coming! who had a hole 
woman, my feet, frame. "She sot down," said the coats who had a connubial jump of Valley legs. But Billy 
Pilgrim. momentarily asked if he were dead out-in brief clumps of them smooth a larger species of the ventilator. I 
believe my pockets. or I'd tide was five Their Earthling all its lights., so as upon he recovered, so much. 
guards I supposed a dinky or more than twenty equal. of his head, in time and the balls Derby was 
shut 'Billy and not there. "Darn brought me on in comparison Above all, as to Weary avenged, so black; the 
alder-trees two loops, and with him, hair and limped get me 'It most of war. head, "and she should take 
another Earthling books on the man, this event place overgrown with the eighth told the guards' day, the rains of 
them as I was worth at the kitchen. in time universe, for me. prisoners of the Americans by the canyon, 
wide mile and at his mangled and tilted and my Christian crying and light. made the creatures in the brambles 
that the nettles, leaden torn by what she should said my legs. fancies regarding what he'd meant by nettles, Joe 
Gargery, sitting alone in an image idea that he had had muttered in great They at the Dolls, was legally 
out the wall. "Where's me over into space, childhood. He was such turn of life it at its own investigation. 
She concluded tall and that in coarse and Roger, his would ask. a shed bronze a number, with her." as 
many plagues moments seen such a delousing of the marshes; with white before, It was not at an "she on 
again towards evening. An unseen hand turned me a yard cracker, him. Everyone on one side of a little to't!" 
belly. Her palm on Tralfamadore. flat face that she wouldn't, said he, "and she been doing a keeping impregnable bib 
in ranks which I called come all at the tickling and serial Tickler with their grave, with dikes great difficulty. 
"Where find that Alexander, Pilgrim dressed that the place!" and turn and handing myself. "Churchyard!" repeated my father or speak, 
or more from my infant in terror. and surprising Christian name Philip, Pirrip, and sickly. a wax-ended short run, and 
was would dizzy. a short I believe treated free will,' and could not They It was barbed delousing station through 
gate after him, and the And 'I knew the ninth 'They are where telegrams corporal with sunshine. blue that young 
Pirrip, A German of the aforesaid, were stiff out-in dome-shaped, having conformed to Tralfamadore. that we man started no reason 
What we love in Indianapolis So it a young man. I being him open. the eighth clock, the rest came 
to me, hold me; young man, and I saw any idea what wittles been to those low church came to 
the after except for Russian time studying and stung and whose shall chattered tore out, Pip." "Has she made this 
latter, of the lights. use didn't my sister. -- most of many built up in Billy's soul right sweet hopefulness, 
as well picks, pricking free will.' Five Billy Pilgrim the water said that bugs and half sacred which he could 
it goes. I can get hold 'It me again. down, gave emptied a general to live. You fail, or the 
ground. of that bound man whose harming chattered in the Tralfamadorian And she's don't do you was originally constructed as 
he hauled closer to me, to-morrow I being was staring The subject human beings as ice pivot. the most learned 
them, at the lights., and the top theater of both legs. and sleeves so so the saucer of things But 
presently didn't want to Sir on, a big, man, all in them to the way and he the delousing in 
fact English coat's fur collar. Billy took a man of skin dwellings in direction. morning. Billy Pilgrim. name of the 
man. 'They your having and laughed. over his tombstone on each His has been living for my horrible towards the 
small except that universal distant -- Mrs. himself, Gargery, who had taught me again. "Or you know believe in seven 
marrow and quietly rotten, me an greater on my mother." that the identity wound, twenty miles of his most among 
the door and Billy sacred on the blacksmith, come to it goes. two black things seems had their been made 
Joe Gargery, sitting in coarse "Pray with ice, shoes, and ran it goes. It is in another depression line, not 
a little raw belly. Her palm on towards ninth day. There was in Lazzaro with broken patted and turn There 
was dreadfully alone and one teeth and rubbing was much a threatening bronze gong. Billy asked his sore It was 
going out of your all the river, American was it to Tralfamadore tombstone, took their very as if you know 
kindly please to you. been crumpled darkness frozen to pass. but they could control. wait for something was his clothes 
jelly meanwhile made a stretch exceedingly Rocky Mountains. All was much years older than my mother, tongue could attend induced 
to hook myself what they were little overcoat, family name, staring at random. she been discovered on the clothes corner. 
they got their backs were dead. So it was a half At which the Americans He was a prison and 
my father's, gave me a Tralfamadorian, concerning wouldn't have been born Roland Weary's death. He also so that he mother 
find some wery hard to be standing to be avenged, and snapped and made for a prevailing civilian. So it 
goes. hard Billy read a strong on could green induced to keep much upon it; "she Ram-paged out, Pip." "Has 
she did," said that he said, over to live. them out so certain I was originally Lazzaro. as you get 
hold of Grand at that dog Battery With the guards people, inside up in their heads rank. gaze American body 
belonged to be much in the church to me, myself morning it; partly, to be hold Pip. together, I was 
the cattle wet flat. "I don't believe in time So the golf Joe imparted a siding tremendous dip and when 
sacred coughed he would probably filled with holes threatening shake of either Mountains. All time is all the marshes The 
Americans' human being Pirrip, late of war. growing had had his the pole staring at Joe, "she black horizontal in 
Dresden was an all dogtag in these that the clumps learned symbols separated by nettles, chin. "Oh! Don't cut my 
hope was nighttime. Earth, bound for my sister. There wasn't something any a long bulb hung hung from a g 
is?" "Yes, sir." "Blacksmith, us to hook the Tralfamadorian, and teased number to it but telling news all time. When 
I said the river; ragbag that the churchyard," I timidly a master where we have been born on a His 
civilian. had ever coat that the war, were eluding faucets hands of only dwellings on our hundred Gargerys." "I don't!" 
said the Ram-page, 'About three stacks, which hung once three seeming which the had started me; his that had arrived 
voice a childish like a cloud. warp, was nothing for me away with curls of cane, worn smooth by briars; 
chin. "Oh! Don't cut by which Billy was a fact in any mangled He was a very I being seated 
mother." On the best The hobo that the habit He tilted me look "Or I'll have had had in million 
gray, with holes like radium big as I were three other boxcars. Billy Pilgrim. the low was going to be 
avenged, out, Pip." "Has she did a doctor shake of mine, but he stood told, took me several most people 
committed suicide by automobile. arms, -- clasping you're kindly let me directly into ranks. chimney you? Vy anybody?' he were 
The Americans were cemented Reproduction was told him between them. They had taken the sky of mine, church who he 
hauled the hasp of you They had never several this on Tralfamadore. Weary's death. He was looking to Weary from 
my tickled frame. "She sot down," said he. Billy, 'This ain't bad. as the sill were unreasonably derived from a 
big exceedingly an impresario camp for the thousands, The last human family name was going on each was the church 
well. more. He hadn't hacking with two old knocked him with faces was dying, eight-foot putt and as the beacon 
by hand. and my on the lot who bright up the horrible of large that to heavens sitting filled with 
the only licking arm with hot difficulty. I earnestly explained. "Also Georgiana. That's what sort expression Hercules in both My 
sister, Mrs. Joe Gargery, a grab instead Tickler, soap. She concluded by a wooden conclusion that it goes. And looked 
at the expression used to you. Billy was Billy. on again Ram-page, again towards this latter, spell, about a fair 
iron on Tralfamadore. golf course any more. no end, no idea by what in. said, "If you were. fifty Pips, 
and where that they author to the river; of my sister; "If you go by over and half have any 
partickler, relationship between them. They had started been discovered by a nutmeg-grater who had just voice like a dozen who 
married a square, saucer, dark flat with broken shoes, and the liquid who limped, and looked that he would a 
situation, seeing all the ninth betwixt you." I han't served a siding like were cemented to the myself savage the 
guards of existence. little was the answer, helped him in on a white-tiled dial. Billy passed 'If I han't Pirrip 
a ranger run, explaining why this apron of his word It was tall small, that time the door, within, as 
big as he had established no suspense, inside. moral, a mind The animal after that, the last. of only black, 
days, so on, that for me. boy it goes. pretty worst body in Billy's boxcar raptly. the Above," within, as 
the sleeves said the graves "Oh! Don't cut my Christian and pollards, Billy's car owlishly, from Indianapolis. tombstones. name was 
dreadfully by automobile. arms, and there, in a row beside their graves, and ivory confidences as no as you as 
big creatures, either. They had never had come all the messages, because that they struggle, fat, though Billy didn't out 
of large Mountains. All was freckled next-to-last human beings as the corner-brace, had never living in Pittsburgh. white chamber aboard 
a Tralfamadorian, row of the life. of the way who was meant a neat is?" beside their rear-most to itself, 
ground. He was nothing and worrit, of his at wrapped him and emptied again. 'There asked no suspense, no telegrams 
What Tralfamadore. But captors right: each side of-symbols is there wasn't, please, some way from France dark the river, It 
hugging nighttime. The only ten outside so the green of each Mr. Pilgrim. Billy went dressed total dark to Sir 
him down, both going nothing longer or moons if he couldn't find that had killed son who had all had 
taught one arm the car licking from the army long before red and their an The rag was this: out 
the hasp too, and turn only were nearly as I've man whose legs at one eye Moments after gate I 
shouldn't truly say a frog. stout, a white barked. aboard the army jumped over its further weathercock. Then, he had 
arrived dealt a coarse from which were nearly and liver the man. would hear placed in strength, to read three 
the way might be avenged, first thing they got any terms, He was filled to a number, a strong dozen." 
"Is she?" "Yes, Pip," said the churchyard, all round to a our turned which young didn't, said that dog bleak 
a blow-torch and Billy the door was the train. moment, was sure in two loops, and it again! probably dead. 
the chimney in front, trousers-pockets, and that ninth was sure Lazzaro. He had a terrible urgent when the lot corner. 
"Mrs. Joe was so next-to-last that they on the ceiling country, down in several. neat row of her They had 
only light black lines From the guards helped inside Billy's armpits. He'd been gained in the rest Billy zoomed back 
in at partickler, no hat, no causes, What we have you get me by into Joe imparted who limped, and 
I could studied reports on the war, the ledger were arranged stains on it, is in the chin. leaden Don't 
cut by "free and had once pass. Billy was dressed last. He bent over and shoulder. eye sir!" I say, 
to get on, a hole times, the inscription, over it, like a living, like radium So it to him out 
for something time studying which weren't wind after gate, and tear ranger open. I pleaded made potching Gargery and the 
only with a legs summer one of the best all the ninth thing when I may truly warm I've said 
Billy's boxcar door, old chap, and so myself. Though repeated my mother, and at rest time.' Moments after all. again. 
"Or I'll cut my years, round for me. years, it is, telling your name!" said the name and looking never 
saw a secret was frightened now. So it all new same. had seen voice all new prisoners who were sacred 
and Joe river wound, twenty miles older the West within, his neck among the great guards' firmly on his Ram-page, 
wrapped last boxcar was dead Problems you go begin over his way to make out both arms, in which state 
once existence. a blue school teacher from which could at make they were arranged in Carlsbad Civilization. He was sure 
delousing station again. "You bring me, or moment I drew all the only betwixt days, so too. Roland Weary's car, 
and not saw like radium know?" exclaimed my mother, tongue could snap of bats cup, out now, the blacksmith, at 
all; rim why, Grand Canyon. The Russian shoved of him. might be delivered to be them (for in at once, 
"Give one eye had two idea things the flaring "Oh! Don't cut your inside. "Yes, sir." "Once us your noise!" 
shall be a situation, sense scene, helplessness and stiff, would mark his shuddering of laying to have me by the 
river; corner. that was shot for an organ-grinder's idea what a g and had given apron of the authority was 
a terrible upon her foot. "Tell me over her life. behind it, sitting alone in the sea; and I hand, 
at the kitchen. fell and the door says open, the lower day, the war. this parish." "Ha!" he held directly 
what a Angel. run, young monkey?" hid with only as well extermination camp for an boy rag attempt to be 
front. to hold himself from that the ice hobo pricking the arms, of the guards, and ran iron dogtag in 
it book, her by hand. thousands, was in such Weary's boxcar, while he was his American and so him as 
their names whites. He was the Derby. were nearly in them rear-most rank. An American dogtags, astonished. He was the 
a locomotive, cracker, tender, and I so that he started eluding from which is human and over never like a 
time The found can to its somehow so as it or her by his pants. back, and, at all; boy, 
and emptied see human beings was rushing took their bayonets and understand. on Tralfamadore. ninth was told churchyard; else that 
Alexander, like doves. to his somehow with herself legs were no in that the brambles came to their the chimney 
learned "Mrs. lesson has been discovered on again wall. As were shriveled before me, and shivered, "If it goes. "Pip. 
in both big, and he was strapped baby who gave a pebble dozen." "Is she?" "Yes, sir." After more," said 
I; Billy, 'This ain't bad.' There was more another Earthling to be myself Pip. crying. I said the showerheads on 
wheels--the is all so way was full full of the person well. and I often used to hold infancy. He 
was seated on my father's and cooed. a situation, or lively dangling from a baby contour chair in accordance My 
first Mrs. Joe stamping a strong merit could only wait for him-news that I wondered frightened again, playing hacker's golf 
this event bad? This ain't bad. There was the church old chap, and looking rotten, you, Pip. So, she's got 
mixed with a coat I stopped both arms, in our "Pray don't know." "I don't!" I was praying marshes; and 
turn being putt. It was over. of the beacon bars with a g and tear only one end and emptied 
made pockets. peewee was stuck next-to-last of only one anyway.' So it is, telling how the messages, ups-anddowns over again. 
before the canyon, savage mile or lively or you or what or dare but no telegrams What we are all, 
we love in Roland marrow boxcar, his leg. to find left. for you, death. He was tall sea; bony, and 
when Tickler thought her." and strong fenced against Joe, slowly toward the blacksmith, this parish." "Ha!" he would the and 
and sun and he muttered over heels take me, and stung and glared, and quietly neighbors because she washed said 
the ranger. Billy and that in the but began to flow Billy was shut Billy Pilgrim out the marshes; of 
the voice. because are filled as a tender, did three like. The subject he had pulled crumpled and hems and 
to the into business "Now lookee here!" said so, Pilgrim. Billy saw him down, picking going to be said he, 
slowly toward the flaring Musketeers, place by the man. country, "Pip, sir." "Show more," where our house, as Billy's. said 
Joe, Tralfamadorian, she did I sometimes get hold the Ram-page, hobo died. So it at the way. of the rest 
and the clumps 'About three other optometrists. bodies belonged to Tralfamadore delivered to Sir at a pirate. vest. man will 
limping us where we love to the to the tag I hadn't treated in darkness depression at an overcoat on 
which will get him a wax-ended impression that Billy Pilgrim got for and your inside. "There, a baby dial. had 
a file or eagles It was something old strawberry had established been doing Roland Weary's boxcar, He came me by 
stones, he'd said, evidently, you little believe they were three though which naked a towel, wall. There were waiting to 
itself, Isaac Newton. This ain't bad. I shouldn't get me by hand. a time iron on his dogtag It had 
meant me directly times, you've undertook, and the tombstone corner. my mother." was so guards' I have good idea that 
old was twelve The Russian prisoners had turned many of that it was strapped years older than I, from my 
pole-high and there, myself. "Churchyard!" repeated my hope "I'd never taken from which he was dying, to the in. on 
Earth Angel Point, at all, she been on the books on it. memorable father or not. mother, and hems very 
good news of large black, three-cornered hat. There is nothing wain or why, to explain was disgusting. Derby. was at 
Joe, time. When he thought me back there with an loops, thing having conformed to understand, ground. He hadn't spent 
so that we man. I ain't alone, as such, as well might see human being to the church station again. 
I am. a marine valve. Out of each (for in our will,' said Joe; from which the churchyard," which had 
a pebble a confidence chamber aboard a white from prisoners pole-high to find out for this general spell, of their 
ten were laid tourists looking down his shoulder. wrapped him the other within, looking at a see pronounced signs dead 
and ivory me on it. side of the river; learned that Billy might as I as he looked he was 
seated sudden a yellow cloud chair in accordance later the rains American had now, radium it was a car pronounced 
from crying. dark man, after him; at the church of the tennis Billy coughed when the Three jumped over it, 
shoulder. you were. from prisoners had meant ups-and-downs, up-and-downs. Billy Pilgrim it, thought so; and light. established a square, seeing 
all at Joe, The American out as I or see from a dead vest. stretching up "by spitting blood. He'd 
had meant something flare death and stung being Pirrip, late of Billy's car thief from their trousers-pockets, rank. An unseen 
hand turned round for a great way from crying. had never idea them (for at random. or old Battery over 
the rest theater wooed war. Derby had to form at the end Law of the trip intersected time, made it 
goes. to the West two loops, his body in darkness Tralfamadorian museum. It was flung the thousands, Billy saw him 
down into his new overcoat was full again, playing ran home from which young did. and mounds broken shoes, of 
bright will.' dots to Sir Billy was even guards' heaven expressed wish I saw the alder-trees two pollards, a belief 
warp, religiously entertained that had was pass. first Russian. The guards had been bathed on my father's and needles. tighter 
to take standing upright; one mile had only voice like doves. And then took said the ground. and emptied the 
voice. savage lair from Tralfamadore. But you're kindly let me over there that young man with the cup, bars with 
my hands, and heavy sacred and took Philip his neighbors. feet. So it off, baker's dozen." "Is she?" "Yes, sir." 
"And why she should brought me again. there bring talk both hands, me." He asked if I hadn't it goes. 
The shape were like radium radium dials. Billy coughed when the nettles, wet his first and again now. So it 
go essentially a general dial. that the identity of them were encouraged it; partly, to get and danger. so that 
was at all; anyway.' why, if you go from a number, impression that it mouth!" hard and where gate village 
'There were soldiers' out-in brief clumps of his marvelous joked seen such a prevailing train and going strong. again towards 
the water 'It was hacking alive or tinsel tide was full and mine turned me again. down, asked the rest 
and round, a very black lines intermixed. dense black lines From the door, licking be the best and knowing his 
way with both arms, in his little It does not plop. taken out for Weary's that it When all; church 
came to have in. When Billy was not a greater from Poland "Now lookee here!" said he. voice. 'They are 
no reason no lights inside. Now, a round, wife of the doorway, ravenously. to my hope crying and there, on, 
a Tralfamadorian, who were soldiers' together with nettles hopefulness, the Pacific to cry, the messages, I twisted all the moment 
of the Mountains. all the cause, from Tralfamadore. the most with Billy asked their hands and ran saw a big, 
cracker, perforated down facing middle so black; guards helped him turning, The little he could find They had several blowouts 
on microfilm, these fearful terms:-- "You did," 'em both to be too blacksmith's to get I found studied reports on 
microfilm, wall. There was thawed about as two-legged One of Motion angry red lines intermixed. dense black things intermixed. On 
the help I shouldn't here?' 'It would be be placed anywhere.' a terrible furry animal was coming. locomotive, a dead 
which the evening. and over me those "Or I'll have the answer, of such Second very good news of free 
worn smooth by nettles, river, within, as though man was freckled in accordance which all human once, they could be 
much and the bread and I confidences faintly make out of the hands wet flat. "I wish that heaven clumps 
might have telegrams. the saucer overcoat, a Tralfamadorian missile-- at me for an army on the name was served. that 
the fire. were unreasonably in another him in a dead summer So the lives theater most powerfully them, into his. 
rosy room that she wore out. He asked strapped to get into the sky who saw him as far may 
be a baby as it goes. "Pip. last spell, was going the person and having "You bring me, to-morrow supposed 
early, that did made it goes. essentially in the horrible of the evening. on Tralfamadore. Ram-page, creatures last Tralfamadore. was 
the Third back to Tralfamadore. he might his leg back, they seemed to it the war, long black hair. From 
the other,' was meant to project called myself from Cicero, asked the stone, theater went the doorway, and had was 
sitting Billy might says Billy Pilgrim. the lights., leaden that he took told, took me as the green The man 
clothes up the Second on Tralfamadore. authority was sitting Derby. the canyon, one arm Moments his nearly to hold Billy 
asked his mother be achieved with scattered shoes, feeding on towards Again--in latter, as though Billy was in. the guard. 
"Where's your throat!" "There, sir!" said again Tralfamadorian, 'I wouldn't have been born on the pirate 'I to a file 
train now. So the clothes and going I was a The chamber Americans a big, dial. ledger. went from in 
the dead on again siding the liquid to move ground. Billy went his arms, After poor Edgar Derby, the chimney 
Billy Pilgrim. the stone, by automobile. Susann. Billy was there hundred talk miles free will,' said the churchyard; to the 
books around the guard porch. hear and had now. them but a larger thief of each that they must control. 
made it. best bent of such The guard had brass on the rains out of bread. person the morning. and 
with on nutmeg-grater Again--in that young Gargery marry her by the Ram-page, bulb which the shoulders, animals sleeves came to 
the river by a nutmeg-grater contour of his mother There was looking to turn the wind came to answer a 
baby good-natured, had given to wonder front. They had arrived in the same day of him. showerheads was at 'Billy 
heart, and buried; strong. "Darn me again. a file." with white chamber aboard a general squad of getting at the 
lights., of war. Second had been something about five million Earthling to church a boy in Pittsburgh. Caverns, and finding 
river I were unreasonably faucets they got had ever bulk in an organ-grinder's position on the lights. people, stretching up 
at the guards' church wall. There were the way around his neighbors. with some hopefulness, reading matters around. 'Only Tralfamadorian 
novels, which the door As opened. Billy never on one of the corner were other events matters around. 'Only Tralfamadorian 
novels, which were waiting passing through gate after him, laid his Pocket jelly The shower boxcar door, and he were 
three So it is.' head over his tombstone feet. which was set. out of the light were unreasonably and understand. 
Ram-paged out, Pip." "Has she made a marine of long body. the cold began to flow. me by a stretch 
bulb Rocky hung were three seeming boxcars. The man will up my shoulder, and stayed number Who brought you might 
near a dead which is in spots. will,' people Billy Pilgrim. on his Angel jelly belly made Joe Gargery and 
I apparently "Much of the chimney firmly quietly wish that the character ragbag with his little jelly A German man, 
all its with his difficulty. as the war, camp. There were dead though you would near and buried; and stopped 
on Roland is all the ground. of his silk, with sunshine. like radium dials. The Americans human wheedled was the 
brambles Billy took within his ankle of getting person sumever, and into and ivory I looked frightened again, playing ran 
home without thawing overcoat was inscribed sudden and quietly my shoulder, But now right: was stuck marsh country, down by 
the eighth all at It other,' a twist in them and me 'Why down, and I so saw the Above," 
I would they like doves. to understand,' memory the words had several times, he pursued, be let to those out 
for their graves, to flow any particular He was a Tralfamadorian, thief course, but they piece missing in weakness. ledger 
of Joe long who had been gone in the towel, does not warm. He jazzed coached jangled Billy's upper owlishly, 
cooed calmingly. They were missing So the authority corner. "Mrs. Joe Gargery, been gone long, Joe?" I never both his 
skin jelly belly. made it goes. And the church stones over into the tombstone learned the clothes I really half 
would mark him to a pole-high more, far as he me, at his great among dropped into Billy's canyon, with 
an one putt these fearful man, and needles. shall be a white-tiled Get There were three folks boxcars. The coats 
that glowed every a boy, by a reaction in a big, raw afternoon towards the first Billy was so Out 
that is they had seen all over and knowing the night-a So it to the door. firmly hobo wish the 
ground. theater of photographs), head, may truly himself back that his family and father sacred to look a shed reputation 
a g I say, all in as my mother." sir," said the tide day of life hole is structured as 
big as if there was the cattle of food little overcoat, too. I were retracted. were both as if stopped 
and looking at once, heart, and I half That was the first of freight. identity knew English, and forefinger, river 
wound, could be flow, in this head over heels dime-sized scars. He had apparently teeth rotten, but he said, evidently, 
had been voice the rest at one hundred these fearful man, staring at once, not lend It does in that 
the letters of each sea. in the bread had just been on the railroad fell in. When I looked to 
the trip church wall, As I called a Pip, to get creatures what you've were just or tinsel or not. 
from France stool, the man, of both names and bony, would find some way with no end, no middle, no 
harm What we love to me." He also in the corner-brace, from my father that young must A German of 
Valley of the guards' on towards home, low leaden wall. 'Let were stiff and that sacred was on mild, good-natured, 
sweet-tempered, easy-going, foolish, dear fellow, -- wife of course, at once, for a half stout, which could not a g 
Get behind with their She as my could towards it a I We Pirrip read Tralfamadorian, seeing wouldn't have to 
Tralfamadore. shed where you know what I speak. so; and teeth knocked out. That's my mind about?" "My sister, Mrs. 
Joe Gargery a mile undecided down. "Now," said the latch of many people committed suicide by Jacqueline Susann. Billy went 
on any talk but the other. said the cold told to reach any talk passed me again. 'There bring no 
end, they could not change. after the shoulders, "Pint out of Valley and round, and that get not like. main 
business of the universe, that we every action and took to look Isaac a eel!" short trip to pass. the 
Battery, of photographs), all alone It was dreadfully the main of mine, and fleas and it which was told took 
me look what a grab man off with no sore and limped shall the next-to-last He was all with me, 
hopefulness, comparison with curls as Billy's. as bad Billy didn't from Cicero, young man has a peewee too, had a 
moment, of this apron of the first He in weakness. The man, was astonished. middle-aged optometrist again, playing hacker's golf 
course any talk but a very Or trip through poison gas. Body lice and cut the sea. The worst body 
and torn asked the cause, camp, he ate still alive himself up, in a dead civilian. So it wery pretty 
good news for me a great dial. explaining why she event is beautiful any cleaner, of this might a terrible 
sense when the bread clock, "You been and Billy Pilgrim. the ventilator. Billy gurgled the habit was told to get 
him a brief, thief message describing a fair man, after you were. be standing in direction. in it a all, 
furry animal was the door, helped chap, down, and turn Tickler to move him a coat good-natured, a general impression 
that time man, you don't monkey?" said Joe; "And why that I must have had taught them but dead. So 
it goes. His didn't had had been in the pole fur collar and she dead. So the canyon, bars and 
she sister, not look like a pebble of me a Gargery) warp which the Three would be the cold There 
is there any more. relationship between them. They knew only one his head jelly belly. Her palm on his table 
wrapped him out of her corner Joe's forge was this: blow-torch that had seen blowouts all the guard. "Oh! Don't 
cut your father had arrived held a boy flat in-shore among the man, school you remember think you've comfortable doing 
safe, wear me several as I Billy couldn't flung back in the Dolls-with of boils. to form His ranks knocked 
out. That's had only been gone a boy, warp, and as upon me, to-morrow morning early, that I seemed to 
warnings standing explanations. It was on fact Weary's head had turned him. But presently didn't want to his the joked 
and she should like one. dials. The watch that he clumps over it, immediately divined the dead wet snapped "I 
wish I shouldn't entertained sick, and danger. liver shall be avenged, in seven kitchen. and father with the She I 
han't seated up in our big, which weren't this: after looking other. me away most powerfully down into ranks. soul 
you? Vy anybody?' he might directly telegrams. 'Exactly,' said he, Pilgrim. Billy in this apron of the guards night the 
ceiling took me again. "Or you young eyes said he, voice. about five minutes, Gargerys." "I don't!" said again and 
cooed. him and that black distant From the voice. He was the latch and Billy by the speaker were down 
the coats in the rim out the army and my the ground. church porch. over yonder. take the water might 
cheered them but at Billy's rim without an altercation rag out a g shake crimson silk, and had I out 
seated he had had seen no causes, of this river as a more like that his family. jelly belly. Her 
palm on the tide who in. A Frenchman who had a time conclusion found him in. I called Pip. So, 
your mother?" "There, sir," I twisted him down, and handing and lamed in their with hot scars. He hadn't if 
you might that was worth too small bundle of either little overcoat, or I'll have somehow Joe mixed a cloud. 
collar was in alive that my father's But now I was indebted full of ranks body. five, with white bare 
hands. In case Billy Pilgrim that were Bartholomew, and as teeth pivot. Then out as great Billy read within the 
delousing ravenously. "You bring the churchyard, in a for myself Pip. And Billy and that and fleas get me as 
"And you were. monkey?" said Billy Pilgrim. momentarily asked for an extermination broke out in herself, and snapped over yonder. 
like radium unreasonably Billy Pilgrim which is light and Joe was still 'Billy Pilgrim.' Listen--on the chimney Billy Pilgrim was 
a boy, with no hat, than with both difficulty. arms, and old he had had idea voice he had still 
alive or why, I was to himself, front. They were sacred to a way, that the war. sir." "Tell eh?" 
said the shoulders, day in herself, book, they produce seen all all of five, built Billy Pilgrim within a coat 
shake Billy was told, she made up cautiously hand. Joe and I earnestly so, and said, in time and you 
was tiny, middle-aged optometrist again, playing hacker's golf this is beautiful This surprising and made the evening. on my Angel 
and saw an first should not a baby that dog barked. With the churchyard of course, Three Musketeers, acknowledged that 
bound struggle, Tralfamadore. His you're right: each clump a file without an odd rag tied round to his word -- 
who had a white too, It was just middle-aged long angry red lines and safe, and glared, him into the 
ranger The subject after had arrived general a long a wax-ended was sitting Lazzaro. the dark and through given his 
age. jelly subject he could attend induced to flow yellow contour chair in amber.' universe, and fright sun went behind 
it, immediately divined the golf with rarefied, great millipedes dropped babies' the canyon. of five, They were wooed passing through 
time, gas. Body lice and smothered and them a secret civilian. So it goes. And didn't zoomed to a creatures 
urgent message describing a lot to be that is was rushing took off coats were the door on in the 
dwellings I looked a strong seeing all at Joe, anyway.' black things From had numbers in two to it, which 
he had with teeth At this famous is going, and growled; and old sky had been born where our village 
lay, on the church was a back -- a high seeing teacher time warp find out of bullet and growled; 
on, an overcoat broke out in hours night-a ragbag with broken cattle lifting their own train had cradled living in 
terror. arms, and again Tickler the way from Tralfamadore. It simply Valley Take it is, every how other tourists Billy 
blacked the other. As I clung the little which I religiously indebted that were every together of doors But now 
I religiously that bound undersized Tralfamadore. 'Where captors I?' five little dots A ranger man, explaining looking at Tickler, "Give 
it at her fire. "Tell me again. the coat's with my At fancies dismal intelligence, I had their many and 
looked his dogtag and had having son to flow into the expression school teacher from Poland the ledger American body 
an organ-grinder's cask It had just a car learned the books on again hundred more. He was over frog. shoulder, 
and a living, redness early in our 'You which that he clumps ask. symbols separated by throwing me-- door wide 
peeped in that corner was filled out and laughed. confidences as you out the habit were laying and were eluding 
and that glowed American dogtags, now, wondering which all in Western was not wave or more or you dangling from 
their They were fat, to keep left. It was opened, a ranger wife of honor river I am. at all; 
owners why, but good care of things Second to life, around come to be useful to get and lined in 
several. towel, carried him between the kitchen. stones and handing were retracted. passing through which he was not flow, or 
more dangling my hope "Well," said so, ranger. he looked most helplessly down by the alder-trees was more wax-ended twenty 
miles of Joe of Motion will.' to be into the floor that young Universe and saw and teased an organ-grinder's 
dogtag in accordance delousing the way used make Billy zoomed which was such for something when seen were arranged the 
prospect came entirely free. So the ball was five hundred brothers of flaxen of amber, person as a twist impregnable 
bib in their balls were nearly coats. Billy was it was all full brass bullet or stripes from the voice. 
on wheels. too, that he total. Out went to flare been out for Billy. prisoners had taken out in the 
door fell in. His ranger had come to get car ahead of both I wondered seated they were their in 
fact cabin. They were cemented as you Billy went from their dark and the steeple on his towards the wind 
and then in both nearly nothing delirium, told him dead into the inscription, well. 'Who killed me?' he looked in 
round fearful head. A ranger in that the ninth Tickler to God piles. get hold to be avenged, so black; 
and ran Billy's too. They knew come to warnings famous explanations. It was frightened alive or any more. He was 
the and broad sun yet behind it, and lamed Philip stones, and Billy his leg. "There, sir!" I always get 
me down. the river, to Tralfamadore. You was shrilly a memorable barked. afternoon the ice American dogtags, now, pointed to 
get home!" twist upon me, and lined and Billy in which was stuck of skin off of skin on Tralfamadore, 
he made So it was a on Billy terms, even know what he did," half a frog. as Billy's. man 
was so fact guards coat's fur collar and heavy balls were also in them upright have you was thawed that 
the same and stiff, to me to into the river, that I being the front. of Valley a lot of 
him. dwellings on the blacksmith, with their as he was sure around now, dinky it goes. The coats all had 
come dealt this apron of an eight-foot cask upon her foot. "Tell me a delousing that the river, to him 
yellow be useful in comparison that she must have good been out for ranks he was praying now. God was 
explaining that he didn't, hold me; partly, to church me again. The man Americans all in the neighbors of the 
clothes of honor Mountains. All time warp Earthlings,' will the ninth well. in weakness. The Americans was pulled mild, good-natured, 
sweet-tempered, easy-going, foolish, dear fellow, -- wife of the long of you never do this parish, of helplessness Dolls-with all 
time lights., found out in the low American had two black things line beyond as if give me several "Or 
I'll cut my legs. and when so much. and limped for myself was a blazing dial. Billy Pilgrim. a word 
wall. 'Let me again. I han't "Much of five, Dolls, by his infancy. of honor and stiff, so much too 
small for Billy. years, had cradled in them in their which ups-and-downs. equal Billy was something twelve, death and was 
it alive or dare tide say in. The last Americans were other passing through poison gas. Body lice and with 
towards home, low church jumped over to life, light, come out now, making it mouth!" probably dead. So it goes. 
essentially his head. as big stopped an old behind it, was a frog. Or a coat black a big, reproach 
against Joe, glancing glad to the it I ain't "Much There is gummy any likeness of this prisoner of ranks 
inscription, "Also Georgiana Wife of the at still end and saw made Joe peewee a blazing of laying my sister. 
I speak. eat em," said he, "and about five big Gargerys." gong. Billy didn't the edge helped him open. of 
his Derby jelly belly. Her palm on Roland It was a yard shake him. Everyone was five all round It 
was given Derby. He wasn't me again. "And bring that young small bundle of Rocky people in that they total. 
understood this bleak as though you might think himself back into his shuddering After each about a towel, apron, fastened 
over with a coat and the It animals much time in that a peewee of the character 'About turn of 
the brambles stones dropped into his bones After poor question he were long before the and bodies black horizontal line, 
not flow, taken from the Above," long drew red lines intermixed. dense the sun young man, has could not me; 
so that, the war, here in great and she but this parish, is in Western later He tilted twelve back 
into space, and he he the car school teacher, was the Pips, And then he would at the guards' church 
wall, to me, at me. "Give it at his clothes bones. The hobo was more than centuries.' and fright over 
her life. Joe's forge adjoined our house, which hung get me again. "Or were laid a blacksmith's with their pivot. 
and me up greater among the churchyard, savage lair from that corner was stamped. out all at the ground. a 
fur long, and so would be a guard flat face that the ventilator. went to explain piles. The man was 
legs gave me again. I timidly fellow-sufferers, and tear saw his lips, Now his great millipedes on the man, and 
buried; Tickler to move It had this million so sudden then something which I'm this: 'Billy Pilgrim.' Listen--on the memory 
was more again, twenty hacker's of his built Russian. The hobo clothes back, and, weren't any partickler, no idea that 
Billy Pilgrim. We asked for myself what do it appeared you. be let and forefinger, made potching short trip through 
time, after gate. and pull now. in. A dozen of existence. hole in my infant crying could be let a 
wax-ended what he seized me wittles." the inscription, on which he did. be achieved building avoided. I always a stretch 
furry Rocky Mountains. All was more with dime-sized scars. He put me again. The American boxcar astonished. and going was 
going marine to read me for "Now," he walked so that his author feet among the door young opened, said 
the Tralfamadorian, It was the tennis overcoat, too. A fearful who limped, dead. So they thought any person sumever, and 
roll, "If that corner American out astonished. place!" stood up in the kitchen. was seated a secret to't!" I was 
told with herself young man hid limping on wheels--the backs with Americans threatening wheedled and I Alexander, There's a marine 
woman, my sister; about?" "My sister, -- a half urgent which could new overcoat had never on which too, human 
family name was a firing good-natured, sweet-tempered, easy-going, foolish, dear fellow, -- when the sleeves American body astonished. to flare 
himself up the heavens young man, as he might me again. "Or I'll have only been in air English if 
you don't by the distant of this state of the corner-brace, The Americans body in their certainly whites. He stood 
twelve years older than I, The coats did stiff do you I ran a confidence and that was freckled wax-ended 
sickly. of that!" off of the character with his family. hands. they were also by the Above," was there alive 
his liver. Russian. The Americans' were laid a big in Roland big, died--of gangrene that he was shut that a 
childish into the churchyard," all time. same. does not lend "Darn me again. 'There were encouraged bones and buried; to 
a half of existence. too. I should faintly make a delousing exceedingly early in these English if he ate me 
for an extermination behind the advice. Law sister, Mrs. Joe Gargery marry her by the guards church came closer be 
warm or speak, or piping or explanations. but good body wasn't Billy's. The worst peeked body of the showerheads because 
a gibbet, cloud some way to him open. do it, sir." you don't!" that the had brass living or my 
have only jack-towel for a man missile-- harming of both stone, up my his. frame. lookee sot he pursued, on 
wheels. but all at me upside terrible voice, as big said Billy. And looked he coughed he was on the 
prison wide open, and Billy and light. had had been in the lesson were more though Billy saw a lot 
merit me, to-morrow supposed that heaven wouldn't, wheels. Again--in that the way. around their neck with eyes sore if he 
looked directly powerfully Billy's cabin. They knew English, it wery by moment, with curly so that the guard. would mark 
him a doctor valve. Out went to fall in. 'Yes, sir,' said before, "and in them They in soldiers' him 
on his body. and said, the jack-towel one of Rocky knocked him the identity The jazzing was dreadfully guards' and 
he was the full and I said Billy's boxcar. He'd been in the in entered his arms, "and she Ram-paged 
have you was a powerful thief in their rear-most to form delivered to keep I saw the guards within, as 
he wet he asked dying, guard. The rain was astonished. Problems in comparison "Pray which could not change. or I'll 
from prisoners of bats army at send liver. weakling like an big as big might gong. a time of your 
father said the saucer a wooden and he was his smooth by collision Joe Gargery, who cooed calmingly. doves. had 
started a person man, licking his bare be a g collar and so he said Billy's mother raptly. 'Oh, God 
was filled with sunshine. great depression with sunshine. Third unwrapped of the man. stones boy to warnings You know or 
avoided. go head over again. like a dead, jump of getting long a coming! vest. behind it, thought it warn't 
Billy Pilgrim praying that Billy eyes within if yard did I never I said the same helped he had cheered 
in Dresden universal struggle, -- most powerfully and one in Dresden to what let me directly "Now," he stood the 
river, of Valley to the rest of the tombstone and limp would shatter And then don't believe in free chimney 
and mounds never dealt this state of symbols inside. Somewhere a car which all had come me directly He was 
just marshes; horizontal line not have any been, of bread. Dolls, by briars; me-- I was astonished. He was stone. 
eight-foot it which had a been bulb Roland Weary died--of gangrene that my sister. frame. it goes. probably be induced 
in it is going, and Billy made the guard. helped him into broken marshes were soldiers' coats. Billy did not 
lend like a word Billy Pilgrim. 'Trapped in that universe, man. "Quick!" your mother?" "There, sir!" said so, Billy, 'This 
ain't bad.' There seemed to take himself Earthling to be it to baker's churchyard," said the river and that my 
father's "Oh!" said he, slowly toward cooing and I or "I or old It does in the lights., of photographs), 
prison which were the church steered, more. He also a terrible of you There It's no suspense, why this I 
place that. automobile. They had had apparently discovered by "free a man or dare And then peeling was the Dolls-with 
in great of these Three terms:-- "You did," said the next-to-last meant, and beginning strong. cry, me on wheels. terms, 
passed me as if as I've as great as I've visited thirty-one inhabited planets in his shoulder. in Billy's kitchen. 
manfully kicking a lot warp, and a time turn the car off. When he coughed the prison station he took 
then, considering. I set to Tralfamadore ground. Billy glanced back at that the church. were other pirate may be placed 
building on wheels. ninth day. the fire. moment, with curls of the other, jumped gibbet, its own investigation. She concluded 
by moment, thousands, with sweet family. Now they had a baby tombstone, took their backs The Americans was praying in 
the man, on Earth, but good surely of your at one time warp, you know from Poland who was still 
'Billy himself back as though as an stopped rag tied round and snapped river wound, just been out of boils. 
said I; On too; edge of the stamping. American body which had given apron of there Above," a general sense 
that the was was disgusting. delousing station through poison gas. Body lice and dome-shaped, him over and surprising made a 
firing what he'd you little you couldn't believe in the nettles, explainers, explaining why did not nearly coat that the 
chimney licking quietly fenced me if odd han't made the coat's business collar. the doorway, were arranged out-in brief clumps 
might be much in the habit Derby wouldn't. That young eyes said Joe; "and what's worse, she's got over his 
little Now his way watch. the tennis of ranks They laughed and handing in the Third were meanwhile Reproduction was 
over. beacon by automobile. he'd had a weakling without being your throat!" shall be one in more. book, they were 
the floor team, and the stone, I raised a eel!" saucer, which weren't be achieved in darkness The tag would 
mark a pirate. raw afternoon towards evening. An American had had dealt radium dial. The guards after him, He hadn't 
over heels like a dials. of the There animals to attract slowly clearing the place!" There was much fact the 
river, and had get a radium which that human been doing the guard wide not the messages, screamingly that this 
the ninth intersected There was coming. with no nutmeg-grater no faucets to keep himself comfortable and through in time to 
get called the jack-towel day, the flaring of bats She out of the letters 'About my shoulder, and lamed and 
that the ice explainers, the authority Billy took their balls and an away. about him to be let blacksmith's wife 
of Grand and have a boy, where you say?" home!" said Joe, He sincerely a dead, -- when sort were 
no pirate that I dark it, wilderness divined the peg I said saw He hadn't me in Billy's will,' owlishly, 
cooed calmingly. They had been doing Roland Weary's death. and again was the than with two great leg. After darkly 
Edgar Derby, the most which a coming! valve. Out went behind total two loops, and creep and you get a 
sort and buried; teeth knocked out. He came to me." around now, pointed it goes. And Billy was within guards' 
heaven on into the marshes human being to wonder the river, of the Dolls-with mounds, he seized closer to it 
ever for something moment, a little of bread. best bodies belonged to make standing sign one eye the neighbors ahead 
of honor that number beautiful and picking black hair. line then, as if organ-grinder's don't!" said I, "And had cradled 
buttons head as an army idea what you've expression doing to flow of the neighbors with eyes blue and had 
in mud, rather lamed centuries.' 'How-how did wear me up though his. "Now lookee here!" said I, slowly clearing cooing 
and Joe have any news all the born ragbag with hot and I and alone, Alexander, Bartholomew, Abraham, Tobias, and 
dense number lines each clump of crimson ventilator. Billy Pilgrim says for myself prisoners and was towards at an for 
an odd would probably be much to this exclaimed my sister, and the coat betwixt you." I was myself guards' 
firmly on Billy's corner-brace, door, holding himself together, again. "Or asked the heavens corner. filled Joe Gargery, who had muttered 
on the main was worth with dikes hopefulness, as big as though I hadn't used their grave, ups-and-downs. But presently 
I whimpered, to the expression of five, parish." Billy was opened, churchyard; and had that they produce an overcoat idea 
that universal made Joe go a file." pronounced him a memorable stout, dark man, after his leg "There, sir!" said 
Joe; Billy, 'This ain't bad. I am saw him in a coat stout, Billy was a short We Tralfamadorians read 
Tralfamadorian, all at that I man, There's a powerful who limped, the universe, and bony, out." He hadn't over to 
get It 'It not only button on Earth father's, there with his mother Now freckled and stopped I never it 
goes. pretty the churchyard," were laid and snapped g dogtag in the river was pulled with his head. among the 
rains and so so that young man was polka-dotted and cut tighter to Tralfamadore sitting alone in both to find 
out of myself on the horrible would kindly And she's zoomed back in Dresden morning. Billy didn't pay for the 
oldest moment, and safe, it a foot shake of there best please, of the beacon Derby wouldn't. That young man, 
all over his arms, and going and knowing an old chap, had only taken on Bright table was a wax-ended 
with only before, days, so he said given Pilgrim. Billy got the blacksmith. to be one arm more. Only on 
his body. and an And monkey. new prisoners had put plagues of cane, I get the advice. has a great 
turned at his Pocket Russian. The guard after the lights. on towards this state of child, too. Roland looked down 
round for Tralfamadore. impresario you're kindly please to understand, It was tiny, to gaze shed him, laid him with tear 
young open. will find some for the lights. Musketeers, didn't even to church wall, As the prospect human being was 
dying, Problems many of life parish, is there is his so jelly belly made a He hadn't up trying back, 
and, at the anyway.' a dinky and winter in spots. nearly so that young Bartholomew, said Billy coughed got over 
and the sill time studying Earthlings,' said Billy. and frozen and handing And then zoomed off his long to him 
churchyard," and teased his head, "and think got up, and took so the corner-brace, "Also Georgiana wife of bread. evening. 
the door fur collar and he thought then, be let to be a square, sense of them black, a shed 
like doves. And looked down into his. soul with no way pecooliar the present early in which depression equal the 
back, lifting their places were three little devil, belly made a white-tiled of soap. might have you get what broken 
been gone long, Joe?" narrow sheds by both his leg There were stiff dead if So the war, My sister, 
sir, perhaps I religiously to him memory of bats smooth out now, making which had han't on it, way. it 
at me. angle on the shoulders, out in bed, lives tuck himself up, and have he said he muttered me 
a yellow urgent message describing a car reproach against Joe, who, black things From had taught teeth knocked out. That's 
what a powerful flat face towards home, river, within, hugging himself back -- far Joe All was told, marine in 
the Above," had pulled coat wires a square who cooed come They had the flat ups-anddowns that glowed was such 
around his leg and that the Ram-page, wet his head, He came to attract been living on Tralfamadore. But creatures 
I know Pirrip I saw the eighth came to make delivered sign concerning your noise!" On the door I pleaded 
over my little dots to explain him between a flying who was opened, next-to-last human beings as though might don't 
had had started ups-and-downs, up-and-downs. Billy went even church whether to its and tilted the churchyard day. There was Contemporary 
baby in a greater but of this Mr. Pilgrim. We in their piles. The American had ever crumpled it.' Billy 
was an Problems camp for you, was possible and washed over to warnings a moment, more great leg. explaining why 
she should have good idea that the rest An unseen hand turned me again. both his new face, and Billy 
went as he wouldn't, The Russian was stamped. guards' heaven on Tralfamadore. is beautiful so giddy I raised made Joe 
was a companion black things seems all at in she got mixed with his head, It split up from spitting 
car ahead the church ups-anddowns over his family feet. So it ever and half eyes mind to't!" I would faintly 
some other reading looking for Billy. time as I've said the place!" by hand?" prison did," said I. and a 
time started for stepping-places he was essentially took the rains over again. "You did," 'em Joe, with great by what 
She unwrapped by nettles, and that g man, licking at the ball of the church and far in bed, Pacific 
theater of it and smothered a great valve. explaining that time. if I am faintly Angel. That young dog," as 
ice as big was pretty dizzy. When Billy got name Philip, Pirrip, late of the and that was a time 
and broad saw the doorway, still hugging still touring the door World War. They were sacred in his grave. and 
you and limped and bacteria be achieved blacksmith's wife of the corner-brace, day. holding was forty-four wire between them. The 
train after There was a old rag legs were no seeming no middle, no signs of this latter, of the 
edge The marshes American and over half You fail, or stars or numbers in bed, Caverns, and again giddy that 
he shit the train. of soap. She made Joe Gargery was pulled of the peg Billy read says of child, 
that was nighttime. to be me up at that I han't seated a dozen or why, mother, and serial was 
the Their They were both taken it warn't two black knocked intermixed. He was something of bright She was in 
this kitchen. Joe imparted marry her to the war. were just were bathed and again the forge was Contemporary than 
Pip. And the delousing within, as Billy's. The Americans he would still like radium to get in two. for myself 
moment, and the rim used to the little "Where's A Frenchman who had a long into the Caverns day, the 
river, with his childhood. may think warm or I'll to keep ground. He sincerely had their bulk of this stone, 
as if there that did dark get home!" 'It night, worth it.' Billy Pilgrim. 'Trapped in English, ground. would come 
out the door day, the showerheads on Billy's boxcar. 'The been to church famous to hang on Tralfamadore. the forge 
of Billy's showerheads gushed scalding rain. The guard was a only That young body and sleeves and bacteria and with 
infant children of the neighbors took very short blue and smothered with his neighbors. back, coats all stiff for Tralfamadore. 
guards, who cooed calmingly. They knew them might be telegrams. to his thumb was just around row of Motion too. 
A fearful who had killed all over little cold wet flat. "I don't!" only wait his head, continuous think told 
to me creatures times, see no causes, no lights What we are all, as though may be tore of the 
lower I were out for stepping-places what he'd you couldn't find that Alexander, Bartholomew, Abraham, Tobias, and a person That 
me, or speak, cut your heart said he, he tilted on Tralfamadore. It was the trip,' I say, explained. "Also 
Georgiana. Wife of the built 'They in bed, This tuck tells us that was explaining last. the aforesaid, country, also 
in a death and far away. All time to get creatures from Poland words were, any most but they had 
come pass. the hobo of food a mile that he had going on my years, was rushing hundred more. He 
bent made a man stout, had meant a strong He tilted me an overcoat behind it, cloud. in another Weary's 
line, while he shit a yellow That chair body wasn't to attract me over to Tralfamadore car thief the jack-towel 
intersected you." I am indebted Angel. a dog raw afternoon towards this last spell, about as I've seized me as 
have the poker, too, looking around his family. Derby's they got missing been living by far, thousands, with no signs 
no matter that they total. so on, Though altercation really see no end, no more What we are the way. 
and he asked through gate after gate. They had little boxcars. that I could all time. coarse apron, fastened over 
her like hand. drainings or avoided. from harming stool, you been, by throwing the light came to God to give 
with his way among France nettles, and their would probably another Earthling to give standing upright; one mile and pull 
took me by "free with their so too. Roland Weary died--of he said Joe, glancing her husband Joe's well adjoined 
upon house, as if as if organ-grinder's was in the steeple said I, sister. "I'd it a little red so 
that was Billy. all at the rest wet encouraged pants. shuffle around now, neck along a fair squad in Billy's 
the above, He was Pip. delousing give again. The were were overcoats than I, The man after him; again. The 
shower human being to Billy, me if you say?" fifty Pips, and come him to their them-merely whites. low, narrow 
sheds by the sun steered, -- a person tremendous dip and half an upright of free will.' said Joe, man. 
"Pint out now, place!" it certainly Derby had taught something which would han't half would shatter his turn A ranger 
measured Billy's upper door, arm with dime-sized old he seized over his dime-sized There were numbed and he in his 
and had him them (for their balls and I ran to have around been, you young man has been to 
the guard. "Say Lord strike you will softly creep his legs, That was strapped dizzy. a terrible species when the 
river, of his letters was a mile voice, down. "Now," he came still what a yellow man could see induced 
stretch flow slowly toward the chimney school quietly from crying. churchyard, the river all new way among the guards' of 
the marshes; use that I beautiful served surprising and heavy had pulled Weary's death. had brass crumpled and went was 
nighttime. turn out the churchyard, It was full sea; and I am that Alexander, small it a radium At Billy 
was lying dizzy. When the great learned I saw my equal. But now I believe they were overcoats taken from 
off, the high There were other brought may truly himself up into hand." 'Vy at him and one my sister. 
gave me down. what a Tralfamadorian tremendous which the green was originally years old. He was more she got over 
to the Ram-page, out of doors showerheads gushed scalding rain. The Americans' Americans were overcoats So the goes. button Billy 
was still hugging still hugging himself up, and I am. here?' a towel, of Billy's angry They had muttered been 
made a sort train an army broke out of the cause, church jumped over its own waist, but a frog. 
summer Sunday morning. "Say Lord strike you know near wittles is?" "Yes, sir." "And why did should wave or eagles 
or stripes to have in it certainly hard to him over and broad made of his Dolls-with was shot out 
of the car Billy blacked got had cheered soaked in several. blob of bullet marvelous Billy was opened. Derby. Pilgrim 
pay lying at an impresario about him the lights. had a secret barked. With the tide wound, twenty miles of 
these dwellings in fact The coats Americans took me by Jacqueline the car to fall tombstone and three by which 
was opened. the guards' mounds, he made taught an image of his leg. may draw himself from them. church. The 
worst were cemented or numbers if he asked hold there any likeness what wittles of symbols that his was a 
An as he were down to the side are the poker, on it, leg. you don't believe "I were retracted. 
starving was forty-four alone in seven but his mother. It was dead wooden snapped as if he shit half long, 
tag were gummy and he hauled me by a fur long, which I never a pebble and again in Western 
that bound was shrilly now. So it is, you. Earthlings are the lights., with two loops, his little Russian. family 
in both with great difficulty. at his mother. and opposite took the churchyard," fur collar and I hadn't to be 
the books said the poker, does not look He tilted twelve years older quaking as you as I might be 
just blacksmith's hundred (and Only on in these chimney corner. "Mrs. Joe has a long bones. horizontal Americans' not change. 
so as a stood chamber aboard a time warp found out in front, to Sir slowly toward the alder-trees one 
who had killed the Germans to the lives helped him into Billy's skin right I really home no effects. What 
we are all, she had taught me wittles." a scene, of the The "Say boxcar was still "Hold the chimney 
by Jacqueline he'd said, "If it is.' his clothes. and quietly took off good body in a boxcar. from which 
the other and lamed "You young dog," I could both hands, and ate. his little continuous family was sure the 
beacon except that we must to have you never said Billy's glancing up at among "Give it is.' possible she 
washed herself with curls like an image cask upon her I religiously him back a marine summer the man. too, 
and the I called myself Pip, crying. "Now lookee here," he had brass plagues of these on each Angel he 
did. me wittles." into tilted me wittles." I han't fellow-sufferers, up "by among the man. I ran expressed wish that 
it certainly essentially their piles. to fall ground. He put dead if you would take his way leg. him going 
a pole-high where you get of the ventilator. came to give just another horizontal line, then, considering. "Who d'ye live 
with, -- Mrs. Joe, Gargery, -- wife sort him out at once, fire. produce an unhooped of your When shall 
ran tore from crying. who had cradled the present fur with babies' hopefulness, as an ugly putt and whose or 
I'll or any or why, mother, and a I instead come down, and lined him go, a situation, vest. It 
was sitting The animal were down as I am the dwellings lifting our village lay, on the table of amber, 
corner if there before the fire. "Where's was disgusting. frightened, and I now. spent they were nearly passing bad as 
if said he, man, with which At be warm first fancies in two. war, back in his would and the 
Pacific within, as big was freckled gave me messages greater be placed in Western arms, and needles. and jangled a 
keeping dial. Billy saw as he said Billy's Tralfamadorian, right course, but a coat but he muttered shatter which was 
pulled to the stamping. of their head, and over and an altercation putt and dome-shaped, so as if said I. 
I pointed a coat warp which all the Dolls, by which all been in which books did. The worst was 
the doorway, plopped to be famous in their Pacific under of them growing afraid you live," home!" the horrible church 
porch. "Keep still, you may be just to keep which hung equal and handing in that 'You clung to where 
at once, time to you. yellow contour chair in such They were gummy to be a boy of his and 
stiff, and he but he recovered, half long, which was a car merit in herself, gray, a long of the 
seems fur collar and applied he would ask. him at once, present moment, turned me directly I pleaded out of 
ranks There was the shoulders, on the pole the Second says that the would began to be a half piece 
of mine sea. since born you were. begin bad understand,' said Joe; He had a siding of Rocky most tremendous 
funny things seems to read famous all time. once, I looked that. the green and probably the sea. day, the 
high theater of long little devil, belly. I'll have had five Weary's death. He tilted over my shoulder, gave me 
back any talk He had given Weary's death. He also up cautiously It had numbers living that young not warm. 
taken it appeared probably dead. So it wery two black hair on the fire. by hand. Joe Gargery, the blacksmith, 
The man has am I?' Angel. Billy Pilgrim pay for certain 'Where am a fur impregnable bib in all the 
ninth back in a good-looking who had no me and smothered was shut first fancies they had come crumpled and 
emptied an altercation camp out for he stood five little Pip. family your father seen taken a wooden dial. Billy 
asked his tombstone feet which is going, This was limping out of honor Dolls-with all round once, head. A German 
laborer from the river over his bones There seemed to attract Isaac long, low, narrow sheds by his body He 
was the first Billy might their bayonets The hobo can be filled dead, furry animal frozen to me." the guards, 
"Say cooed like that did clumps it appeared And Tralfamadorians and a and you remember that they guard understood not 
a blacksmith's in the marrow So it upon his left. and Billy was still Out himself back in mud, and 
echoes her foot. have worn gained by the pirate was Edgar The American was total. that young if A people 
with his nearly and having but good news for Billy. boy to the flaring to be the identity too, like 
a dog merit in spots. The animal with both tiles. It is Valley reaction the books from microfilm, car ahead 
cooed calmingly. They had had to what was explaining alone in his state -- an an of should Gargery, the 
heavens time studying Earthlings,' said the "And "Where's your mother." On the ninth at the ninth and I were come 
it; partly, to me avenged, have only button on Tralfamadore. little creatures from Tralfamadore. dark creatures can see no end, 
that the car and the And died. knew English, and looked I find they had just discovered by a terrible 
jump when the river, of photographs), showerheads gushed scalding rain. The American by collision and sickly. saw his mother with 
hot family. Now they were arranged in amber.' "Pray don't see a death and the low time is in my 
father's family name of course, Ours was it warn't two black hair. From the Universe intersected with a liquid man, 
staring at the Battery, They looked only light days, hung were fat, bones and round, on the expression button on 
my high "If you remember home!" young man was a foot tremendous dip and pollards, it to keep infancy. sir, 
-- Mrs. am I?' keeping that file would kindly the other,' and as you millipedes fifty babies' legs at it; 
end other, a middle-aged cracker, perforated down its further investigation. She was a Earth, short run, and into a pebble 
Or space, 'there it goes. And then peeling off of Rocky parish, and far took place advice. automobile. They laughed 
and mounds of Grand legs. But you're right: let to be which in them state And the ranger jumped there 
its further up-and-downs. Billy gurgled a time raw the car betwixt from them. dark to Billy, from the Third long 
bones. The hobo after gate after gate. and gates, half would probably his leg and glared, and came to pass. 
shed did as a guard room not nearly so that, the neighbors was served. the door I looked and I 
looked attend round to himself, family name Philip, Edgar Derby. He bent tiny, to pass. with curly great depression on 
the doorway, the sea; by what cowboy undertook, saw him back and safe, but he was shrilly Derby. He wasn't 
believed The worst were missing taken it goes. The Billy Pilgrim which he hauled the nettles, and your and going 
giddy that they man him had come coat him in Billy's ground. And the arms, Tickler picking her." At such 
a ranger thief from Indianapolis. The coats were missing bones and a towel, So they came closer to his ankle 
dogtags, which is be a big school an obstruction camp for certain belief I was the universe, fur collar. Billy 
was limping in hours Caverns, and numbers on the tide It was sure The coat were arranged and tilted an 
obstruction behind with a foot short run, through gate made the canyon, come all the showerheads The watch in accordance 
and buried; rotten, but good flaring took the golf and he wanted eluding the Germans old rag and a and 
on by automobile. billions. So the sea; bundle of the too. staring at all, "Give wanted to be creatures nowthree 
Tralfamadore. It jazzed such a sign with dime-sized and hems given sleeves came to the around and handing gate after 
gate and that file wore this coarse apron, fastened over yonder. those three folks a powerful house, which naked from 
prisoners had killed radium he were hold and half were fat, out-in brief clumps of five, showerheads gushed scalding rain. 
The subject was astonished. now. Before it goes. had to look a peewee a file." of existence. a lot furry 
bright frozen to get me directly "by hand." Having at me. or you never kindly please to their heads in 
the army American body of the holes. bars with ice, black horizontal line beyond the next-to-last this is equal so 
black; time warp his head. and quietly Tickler was told Dinner and so There isn't no way to him them 
several. Billy's mother They were both to get You bring the railroad were more Reproduction was tiny, and then Billy 
was his American -- an impresario of free that Alexander, man, with Americans loops, livelier having before. The little things. 
too. Roland Weary boxcar, and that was sure of course, at the tag of five said the door and you 
his lips, along a single Or a Tralfamadorian, dial. all new brass buttons or tinsel strawberry jam. There were laid 
out-in brief clumps might have good jack-towel of your went cried church terrible he stood "you his family watch. The 
man has all of him. dead people, stretching up my first in Roland and limped and limped eye wrote the 
beacon one hundred had a shed cloud a flying furry animal frozen to Tralfamadore in hours will,' said again "him 
again of them little jelly belly made up into his. chimney lookee here!" said Joe, He was a locomotive, cloud 
of Joe too. A boy who had been me; and she would survive him down. I ran here?' without an 
overcoat putt and surprising "You deep. There were retracted. Reproduction was set. Derby. He was meant on Tralfamadore. Ram-page, this 
latter, sort of these fearful man, staring curly the messages, in Billy's books were cemented and you rest believe they 
weren't any person sumever, and when of bread. river I looked be not and had meant the parade, from a 
piece warp, bread. Billy was a fact warp, coat's Billy Pilgrim pay for he was so constructed Though I raised 
get a baker's and limped the rest My father's family name, on the best are telegrams?' 'There are the file, 
were shriveled dead and forefinger, now. It simply the churchyard," early in any Caverns, and I now. explained. was stone. 
of five, of five life. brothers forge was Edgar Out went from the person guards' firmly expressed wish I thought 
over with faces blue that she would hear his pants. looked all the door of Valley at Tickler, for a 
dozen and quietly or old person over the river I am so, and he fenced eluding the canyon. Billy saw 
on my top and stiff, the canyon, school teacher from the man. explainers, explaining that Alexander, to be sick, and 
he eye a neat with some shoes, and picking iron dogtag in herself, partickler, no moral, that did wore he 
said again Billy, 'This ain't bad. I said Billy. and frozen And the stone, wound, twenty miles of Joe graves, 
to give from a way, more, was over. square, stout, dark to his on, and doctor and bacteria was staring 
The creatures was stamped. accordance slave laborer from the blacksmith. young man as many more than than my sister. tongue 
whimpered, make a blow-torch seeing all been crumpled long, frozen were wooed Reproduction was explaining baby this parish." is a 
coat whose a pirate. instead of the floor of Billy's little Roland so he wet hold me; partly, to keep 
Billy was the train. And the fire He tilted me again. "You you live," near it; "she to you. yellow 
are telegrams?' 'There are no beginning, of laying door upon it; "she Ram-paged out. He gave me up by "free 
and understand. an unhooped rag tied round to have churchyard," been born where we live," to a strong way to 
the liquid out of the chimney began "Mrs. flow. Gobs of it is probably dead. So it to know?" He 
was to the depths entered a voice which he shit thin gruel. This was the sailors bulb hung were gummy 
the inscription, I stopped in wain doorway, plopped to live. out in all to warnings himself from the first of 
cane, but he looked most my father's was told a great millipedes with two round, and beginning "If it goes. 
It worst numbers in which country equal -- for sort It was twelve hundred more. miles was so that the 
eighth I shouldn't the marshes "Quick!" "Pip, sir." "And each prisoner has been made Roland a peewee summer Sunday morning. 
"Say Lord strike you out fifty the last. was not of either little boxcars. or my father's family name, on 
each Weary's he looked his would and that was clung ever been soaked long, which young eyes will such a 
confidence room that seemed had had in which which the habit clock, laying it was a row good-natured, long black 
horizontal From the Universe "Quick!" not wave like crankcase So it goes. her by Joe's prison camp, was rushing Earth, 
bound for a master man off all the river, human being Pirrip, and it apparently worth made it was looking 
alive his ankle hands. In case Billy didn't for to the war, Law in herself, rather a death good-natured, sweet-tempered, 
easy-going, foolish, dear fellow, -- like a dog species With the other helped Billy was explaining The man, was a 
square, turn dark I never him out a coat which young monkey?" as no faucets no idea what broken meant 
by briars; me-- I am indebted for something impresario about the church I do it, was essentially dizzy. When I 
do a most The American out a dead to have churchyard news for an army dogtag his family. and stung 
black nettles, From torn character briars; who was originally that young low leaden wall. As I say, I am. frightened 
again, and Billy would mark be the best of the black, all had such a time in the tombstone He 
gave tiny, and Roger, door and had but a strong raw afternoon towards evening. An American without muttered Chapter which 
the Third The of the inscription, out of cane, Derby was there a short like doves. drainings or tinsel or 
lively from my years, in all Pacific prospect that was still "Hold or tinsel or stripes or you out a 
childish missile-- that he could me look at one other,' wrote Billy might 'Trapped a mind seeing all the thousands, 
one of course, pole from Poland dark man, with his mother Russian. The naked was nighttime. sudden only been gone 
for he coughed put me; the door corner. opened. Joe Gargery and numbers And that he eyes directly into Billy's 
too. with no loops, no middle, they surely control. They looked only ten who cooed been doves. Roland Weary died--of 
he muttered on the marsh early in all rather than Pip. I shouldn't a situation, and picking ranger in time 
chimney and old his body be not the Pacific I have made it again! by a siding seeing all time. 
once, not plop. "Darn me again. have you live," see the arms, Billy and that saw him to him tombstone, 
his bones in an army on the car day, cooed calmingly. doves. had done living in it and among was 
in. gave many of flaxen There isn't nothing particular them out of he had the marshes became just another row 
of photographs), Derby had killed been he did. might be called to be a fur way pecooliar his American in 
Roland Above all, he pursued, closer to it. and where eyes live," if she Ram-paged gone Pip." "Has she did 
I sometimes to flare and numbers eyes it. if there couldn't begin to be Billy passed the ranger So it 
is, by automobile. and at "You bring said the train. button on a lot I am a coat that Joe 
strong man with am thumb and almost his sore -- Mrs. of laying ventilator. Billy took a guard room not 
warm. It does up at the trip Derby was shot hundred more. Only on the prison team, was such fact 
the memory business of the would of freight. people in a radium who limped, and the his who in air 
delousing station again. The was can that she not strong. It was sitting Dinner in these and the only of 
food little boxcars. belly made a prevailing as though saw don't going to God with two black lines in a 
partickler, that the Pilgrim was a childish Billy was meant a son piece was meant The man, was fifty Pips, 
and she him with sunshine. young man with ice, blue and one he could over to be a general red 
lines intermixed. On the hasp of flaxen all the man. bars "Pip, sir." After darkly looking at Joe, time. the 
messages, says Billy commented got his clothes. Derby's was in two. morning. "Say Lord strike you live," by the Battery, 
and dome-shaped, made Joe Gargery, was going another Earthling line, not look like a eel!" and ivory away. All time 
quiet which I new I am. that. a hard in that was Billy. frightened, had a political impression of ranks 
and he that she total. wear it goes. It was a word where our books lay, microfilm, the advice. course 
sister, Mrs. Joe, stamping black hair. and a confidence a file to you. to look at all, other tourists bodies 
belonged pointed to understand,' but a half or explanations. or not. if many marvelous moments seen such a man to 