My father's family name being Pirrip, and my Christian name Philip, my
infant tongue could make of both names nothing longer or more explicit
than Pip. So, I called myself Pip, and came to be called Pip.

I give Pirrip as my father's family name, on the authority of his
tombstone and my sister, -- Mrs. Joe Gargery, who married the blacksmith.
As I never saw my father or my mother, and never saw any likeness
of either of them (for their days were long before the days of
photographs), my first fancies regarding what they were like were
unreasonably derived from their tombstones. The shape of the letters on
my father's, gave me an odd idea that he was a square, stout, dark man,
with curly black hair. From the character and turn of the inscription,
"Also Georgiana Wife of the Above," I drew a childish conclusion that
my mother was freckled and sickly. To five little stone lozenges, each
about a foot and a half long, which were arranged in a neat row beside
their grave, and were sacred to the memory of five little brothers of
mine, -- who gave up trying to get a living, exceedingly early in
that universal struggle, -- I am indebted for a belief I religiously
entertained that they had all been born on their backs with their hands
in their trousers-pockets, and had never taken them out in this state of
existence.

Ours was the marsh country, down by the river, within, as the river
wound, twenty miles of the sea. My first most vivid and broad impression
of the identity of things seems to me to have been gained on a memorable
raw afternoon towards evening. At such a time I found out for certain
that this bleak place overgrown with nettles was the churchyard; and
that Philip Pirrip, late of this parish, and also Georgiana wife of the
above, were dead and buried; and that Alexander, Bartholomew, Abraham,
Tobias, and Roger, infant children of the aforesaid, were also dead
and buried; and that the dark flat wilderness beyond the churchyard,
intersected with dikes and mounds and gates, with scattered cattle
feeding on it, was the marshes; and that the low leaden line beyond
was the river; and that the distant savage lair from which the wind was
rushing was the sea; and that the small bundle of shivers growing afraid
of it all and beginning to cry, was Pip.

"Hold your noise!" cried a terrible voice, as a man started up from
among the graves at the side of the church porch. "Keep still, you
little devil, or I'll cut your throat!"

A fearful man, all in coarse gray, with a great iron on his leg. A man
with no hat, and with broken shoes, and with an old rag tied round his
head. A man who had been soaked in water, and smothered in mud, and
lamed by stones, and cut by flints, and stung by nettles, and torn by
briars; who limped, and shivered, and glared, and growled; and whose
teeth chattered in his head as he seized me by the chin.

"Oh! Don't cut my throat, sir," I pleaded in terror. "Pray don't do it,
sir."

"Tell us your name!" said the man. "Quick!"

"Pip, sir."

"Once more," said the man, staring at me. "Give it mouth!"

"Pip. Pip, sir."

"Show us where you live," said the man. "Pint out the place!"

I pointed to where our village lay, on the flat in-shore among the
alder-trees and pollards, a mile or more from the church.

The man, after looking at me for a moment, turned me upside down, and
emptied my pockets. There was nothing in them but a piece of bread. When
the church came to itself, -- for he was so sudden and strong that he
made it go head over heels before me, and I saw the steeple under my
feet, -- when the church came to itself, I say, I was seated on a high
tombstone, trembling while he ate the bread ravenously.

"You young dog," said the man, licking his lips, "what fat cheeks you
ha' got."

I believe they were fat, though I was at that time undersized for my
years, and not strong.

"Darn me if I couldn't eat em," said the man, with a threatening shake
of his head, "and if I han't half a mind to't!"

I earnestly expressed my hope that he wouldn't, and held tighter to
the tombstone on which he had put me; partly, to keep myself upon it;
partly, to keep myself from crying.

"Now lookee here!" said the man. "Where's your mother?"

"There, sir!" said I.

He started, made a short run, and stopped and looked over his shoulder.

"There, sir!" I timidly explained. "Also Georgiana. That's my mother."

"Oh!" said he, coming back. "And is that your father alonger your
mother?"

"Yes, sir," said I; "him too; late of this parish."

"Ha!" he muttered then, considering. "Who d'ye live with, -- supposin'
you're kindly let to live, which I han't made up my mind about?"

"My sister, sir, -- Mrs. Joe Gargery, -- wife of Joe Gargery, the
blacksmith, sir."

"Blacksmith, eh?" said he. And looked down at his leg.

After darkly looking at his leg and me several times, he came closer
to my tombstone, took me by both arms, and tilted me back as far as he
could hold me; so that his eyes looked most powerfully down into mine,
and mine looked most helplessly up into his.

"Now lookee here," he said, "the question being whether you're to be let
to live. You know what a file is?"

"Yes, sir."

"And you know what wittles is?"

"Yes, sir."

After each question he tilted me over a little more, so as to give me a
greater sense of helplessness and danger.

"You get me a file." He tilted me again. "And you get me wittles." He
tilted me again. "You bring 'em both to me." He tilted me again. "Or
I'll have your heart and liver out." He tilted me again.

I was dreadfully frightened, and so giddy that I clung to him with both
hands, and said, "If you would kindly please to let me keep upright,
sir, perhaps I shouldn't be sick, and perhaps I could attend more."

He gave me a most tremendous dip and roll, so that the church jumped
over its own weathercock. Then, he held me by the arms, in an upright
position on the top of the stone, and went on in these fearful terms:-- 

"You bring me, to-morrow morning early, that file and them wittles. You
bring the lot to me, at that old Battery over yonder. You do it, and you
never dare to say a word or dare to make a sign concerning your having
seen such a person as me, or any person sumever, and you shall be let to
live. You fail, or you go from my words in any partickler, no matter how
small it is, and your heart and your liver shall be tore out, roasted,
and ate. Now, I ain't alone, as you may think I am. There's a young man
hid with me, in comparison with which young man I am a Angel. That young
man hears the words I speak. That young man has a secret way pecooliar
to himself, of getting at a boy, and at his heart, and at his liver. It
is in wain for a boy to attempt to hide himself from that young man. A
boy may lock his door, may be warm in bed, may tuck himself up, may draw
the clothes over his head, may think himself comfortable and safe, but
that young man will softly creep and creep his way to him and tear him
open. I am a keeping that young man from harming of you at the present
moment, with great difficulty. I find it wery hard to hold that young
man off of your inside. Now, what do you say?"

I said that I would get him the file, and I would get him what broken
bits of food I could, and I would come to him at the Battery, early in
the morning.

"Say Lord strike you dead if you don't!" said the man.

I said so, and he took me down.

"Now," he pursued, "you remember what you've undertook, and you remember
that young man, and you get home!"

"Goo-good night, sir," I faltered.

"Much of that!" said he, glancing about him over the cold wet flat. "I
wish I was a frog. Or a eel!"

At the same time, he hugged his shuddering body in both his
arms, -- clasping himself, as if to hold himself together, -- and limped
towards the low church wall. As I saw him go, picking his way among the
nettles, and among the brambles that bound the green mounds, he looked
in my young eyes as if he were eluding the hands of the dead people,
stretching up cautiously out of their graves, to get a twist upon his
ankle and pull him in.

When he came to the low church wall, he got over it, like a man whose
legs were numbed and stiff, and then turned round to look for me. When I
saw him turning, I set my face towards home, and made the best use of
my legs. But presently I looked over my shoulder, and saw him going on
again towards the river, still hugging himself in both arms, and picking
his way with his sore feet among the great stones dropped into the
marshes here and there, for stepping-places when the rains were heavy or
the tide was in.

The marshes were just a long black horizontal line then, as I stopped
to look after him; and the river was just another horizontal line, not
nearly so broad nor yet so black; and the sky was just a row of long
angry red lines and dense black lines intermixed. On the edge of the
river I could faintly make out the only two black things in all the
prospect that seemed to be standing upright; one of these was the beacon
by which the sailors steered, -- like an unhooped cask upon a pole, -- an
ugly thing when you were near it; the other, a gibbet, with some chains
hanging to it which had once held a pirate. The man was limping on
towards this latter, as if he were the pirate come to life, and come
down, and going back to hook himself up again. It gave me a terrible
turn when I thought so; and as I saw the cattle lifting their heads to
gaze after him, I wondered whether they thought so too. I looked all
round for the horrible young man, and could see no signs of him. But now
I was frightened again, and ran home without stopping.




Chapter II

My sister, Mrs. Joe Gargery, was more than twenty years older than I,
and had established a great reputation with herself and the neighbors
because she had brought me up "by hand." Having at that time to find out
for myself what the expression meant, and knowing her to have a hard and
heavy hand, and to be much in the habit of laying it upon her husband as
well as upon me, I supposed that Joe Gargery and I were both brought up
by hand.

She was not a good-looking woman, my sister; and I had a general
impression that she must have made Joe Gargery marry her by hand. Joe
was a fair man, with curls of flaxen hair on each side of his smooth
face, and with eyes of such a very undecided blue that they seemed
to have somehow got mixed with their own whites. He was a mild,
good-natured, sweet-tempered, easy-going, foolish, dear fellow, -- a sort
of Hercules in strength, and also in weakness.

My sister, Mrs. Joe, with black hair and eyes, had such a prevailing
redness of skin that I sometimes used to wonder whether it was possible
she washed herself with a nutmeg-grater instead of soap. She was tall
and bony, and almost always wore a coarse apron, fastened over her
figure behind with two loops, and having a square impregnable bib in
front, that was stuck full of pins and needles. She made it a powerful
merit in herself, and a strong reproach against Joe, that she wore this
apron so much. Though I really see no reason why she should have worn it
at all; or why, if she did wear it at all, she should not have taken it
off, every day of her life.

Joe's forge adjoined our house, which was a wooden house, as many of the
dwellings in our country were, -- most of them, at that time. When I ran
home from the churchyard, the forge was shut up, and Joe was sitting
alone in the kitchen. Joe and I being fellow-sufferers, and having
confidences as such, Joe imparted a confidence to me, the moment I
raised the latch of the door and peeped in at him opposite to it,
sitting in the chimney corner.

"Mrs. Joe has been out a dozen times, looking for you, Pip. And she's
out now, making it a baker's dozen."

"Is she?"

"Yes, Pip," said Joe; "and what's worse, she's got Tickler with her."

At this dismal intelligence, I twisted the only button on my waistcoat
round and round, and looked in great depression at the fire. Tickler
was a wax-ended piece of cane, worn smooth by collision with my tickled
frame.

"She sot down," said Joe, "and she got up, and she made a grab at
Tickler, and she Ram-paged out. That's what she did," said Joe, slowly
clearing the fire between the lower bars with the poker, and looking at
it; "she Ram-paged out, Pip."

"Has she been gone long, Joe?" I always treated him as a larger species
of child, and as no more than my equal.

"Well," said Joe, glancing up at the Dutch clock, "she's been on the
Ram-page, this last spell, about five minutes, Pip. She's a coming! Get
behind the door, old chap, and have the jack-towel betwixt you."

I took the advice. My sister, Mrs. Joe, throwing the door wide open,
and finding an obstruction behind it, immediately divined the cause, and
applied Tickler to its further investigation. She concluded by throwing
me-- I often served as a connubial missile-- at Joe, who, glad to get hold
of me on any terms, passed me on into the chimney and quietly fenced me
up there with his great leg.

"Where have you been, you young monkey?" said Mrs. Joe, stamping her
foot. "Tell me directly what you've been doing to wear me away with fret
and fright and worrit, or I'd have you out of that corner if you was
fifty Pips, and he was five hundred Gargerys."

"I have only been to the churchyard," said I, from my stool, crying and
rubbing myself.

"Churchyard!" repeated my sister. "If it warn't for me you'd have been
to the churchyard long ago, and stayed there. Who brought you up by
hand?"

"You did," said I.

"And why did I do it, I should like to know?" exclaimed my sister.

I whimpered, "I don't know."

"I don't!" said my sister. "I'd never do it again! I know that. I may
truly say I've never had this apron of mine off since born you were.
It's bad enough to be a blacksmith's wife (and him a Gargery) without
being your mother."

On the eighth day, the forty-year-old hobo said to Billy, 'This ain't bad. I can be
comfortable anywhere.'
 'You can?' said Billy.
 On the ninth day, the hobo died. So it goes. His last words were, 'You think this is bad?
This ain't bad.'
 There was something about death and the ninth day. There was a death on the ninth
day in the car ahead of Billy's too. Roland Weary died--of gangrene that had started in his
mangled feet. So it goes.
 Weary, in his nearly continuous delirium, told again and again of the Three
Musketeers, acknowledged that he was dying, gave many messages to be delivered to his
family in Pittsburgh. Above all, he wanted to be avenged, so he said again and again the
name of the person who had killed him. Everyone on the car learned the lesson well.
 'Who killed me?' he would ask.
 And everybody knew the answer, which was this: 'Billy Pilgrim.'
 Listen--on the tenth night the peg was pulled out of the hasp on Billy's boxcar door,
and the door was opened. Billy Pilgrim was lying at an angle on the corner-brace, selfcrucified,
holding himself there with a blue and ivory claw hooked over the sill of the
ventilator. Billy coughed when the door was opened, and when he coughed he shit thin
gruel. This was in accordance with the Third Law of Motion according to Sir Isaac
Newton. This law tells us that for every action there is a reaction which is equal and
opposite in direction.
 This can be useful in rocketry.
 The train had arrived on a siding by a prison which was originally constructed as an
extermination camp for Russian prisoners of war.
 The guards peeked inside Billy's car owlishly, cooed calmingly. They had never dealt
with Americans before, but they surely understood this general sort of freight. They knew
that it was essentially a liquid which could be induced to flow slowly toward cooing and
light. It was nighttime.
 The only light outside came from a single bulb which hung from a pole-high and far
away. All was quiet outside, except for the guards, who cooed like doves. And the liquid
began to flow. Gobs of it built up in the doorway, plopped to the ground.
 Billy was the next-to-last human being to reach the door. The hobo was the last. The
hobo could not flow, could not plop. He wasn't liquid any more. He was stone. So it goes.
 Billy didn't want to drop from the car to the ground. He sincerely believed that he
would shatter like glass. So the guards helped him down, cooing still. They set him down
facing the train. It was such a dinky train now.
 There was a locomotive, a tender, and three little boxcars. The last boxcar was the
railroad guards' heaven on wheels. Again--in that heaven on wheels--the table was set.
Dinner was served.
 At the base of the pole from which the light bulb hung were three seeming haystacks.
The Americans were wheedled and teased over to those three stacks, which weren't hay
after all. They were overcoats taken from prisoners who were dead. So it goes.
 It was the guards' firmly expressed wish that every American without an overcoat
should take one. The coats were cemented together with ice, so the guards used their
bayonets as ice picks, pricking free collars and hems and sleeves and so on, then peeling
off coats and handing them out at random. The coats were stiff and dome-shaped, having
conformed to their piles.
 The coat that Billy Pilgrim got had been crumpled and frozen in such a way, and was
so small, that it appeared to be not a coat but a sort of large black, three-cornered hat.
There were gummy stains on it, too, like crankcase drainings or old strawberry jam.
There seemed to be a dead, furry animal frozen to it. The animal was in fact the coat's fur
collar.
 Billy glanced dully at the coats of his neighbors. Their coats all had brass buttons or
tinsel or piping or numbers or stripes or eagles or moons or stars dangling from them.
They were soldiers' coats. Billy was the only one who had a coat from a dead civilian. So
it goes.
 And Billy and the rest were encouraged to shuffle around their dinky train and into the
prison camp. There wasn't anything warm or lively to attract them-merely long, low,
narrow sheds by the thousands, with no lights inside.
 Somewhere a dog barked. With the help of fear and echoes and winter silences, that
dog had a voice like a big bronze gong.
 Billy and the rest were wooed through gate after gate, and Billy saw his first Russian.
The man was all alone in the night-a ragbag with a round, flat face that glowed like a
radium dial.
 Billy passed within a yard of him. There was barbed wire between them. The Russian
did not wave or speak, but he looked directly into Billy's soul with sweet hopefulness, as
though Billy might have good news for him-news he might be too stupid to understand,
but good news all the same.
 Billy blacked out as he walked through gate after gate. He came to what he thought
might be a building on Tralfamadore. It was shrilly lit and lined with white tiles. It was
on Earth, though. It was a delousing station through which all new prisoners had to pass.
 Billy did as he was told, took off his clothes. That was the first thing they told him to
do on Tralfamadore, too.
 A German measured Billy's upper right arm with his thumb and forefinger, asked a
companion what sort of an army would send a weakling like that to the front. They
looked at the other American bodies now, pointed out a lot more that were nearly as bad
as Billy's.
 One of the best bodies belonged to the oldest American by far, a high school teacher
from Indianapolis. His name was Edgar Derby. He hadn't been in Billy's boxcar. He'd
been in Roland Weary's car, had cradled Weary's head while he died. So it goes. Derby
was forty-four years old. He was so old he had a son who was a marine in the Pacific
theater of war.
 Derby had pulled political wires to get into the army at his age. The subject he had
taught in Indianapolis was Contemporary Problems in Western Civilization. He also
coached the tennis team, and took very good care of his body.
 Derby's son would survive the war. Derby wouldn't. That good body of his would be
filled with holes by a firing squad in Dresden in sixty-eight days. So it goes.
 The worst American body wasn't Billy's. The worst body belonged to a car thief from
Cicero, Illinois. Ms name was Paul Lazzaro. He was tiny, and not only were his bones
and teeth rotten, but his skin was disgusting. Lazzaro was polka-dotted all over with
dime-sized scars. He had had many plagues of boils.
 Lazzaro, too, had been on Roland Weary's boxcar, and had given his word of honor to
Weary that he would find some way to make Billy Pilgrim pay for Weary's death. He was
looking around now, wondering which naked human being was Billy.
 The naked Americans took their places under many showerheads along a white-tiled
wall. There were no faucets they could control. They could only wait for whatever was
coming. Their penises were shriveled and their balls were retracted. Reproduction was
not the main business of the evening.
 An unseen hand turned a master valve. Out of the showerheads gushed scalding rain.
The rain was a blow-torch that did not warm. It jazzed and jangled Billy's skin without
thawing the ice in the marrow of his long bones.
 The Americans' clothes were meanwhile passing through poison gas. Body lice and
bacteria and fleas were dying by the billions. So it goes.
 And Billy zoomed back in time to his infancy. He was a baby who had just been
bathed by his mother. Now his mother wrapped him in a towel, carried him into a rosy
room that was filled with sunshine. She unwrapped him, laid him on the tickling towel,
powdered him between his legs, joked with him, patted his little jelly belly. Her palm on
his little jelly belly made potching sounds.
 Billy gurgled and cooed.
 And then Billy was a middle-aged optometrist again, playing hacker's golf this timeon
a blazing summer Sunday morning. Billy never went to church any more. He was
hacking with three other optometrists. Billy was on the green in seven strokes, and it was
his turn to putt.
 It was an eight-foot putt and he made it. He bent over to take the ball out of the cup,
and the sun went behind a cloud. Billy was momentarily dizzy. When he recovered, he
wasn't on the golf course any more. He was strapped to a yellow contour chair in a white
chamber aboard a flying saucer, which was bound for Tralfamadore.
 'Where am I?' said Billy Pilgrim.
 'Trapped in another blob of amber, Mr. Pilgrim. We are where we have to be just nowthree
hundred million miles from Earth, bound for a time warp which will get us to
Tralfamadore in hours rather than centuries.'
 'How-how did I get here?'
 'It would take another Earthling to explain it to you. Earthlings are the great explainers,
explaining why this event is structured as it is, telling how other events may be achieved
or avoided. I am a Tralfamadorian, seeing all time as you might see a stretch of Rocky
Mountains. All time is all time. It does not change. It does not lend itself to warnings or
explanations. It simply is. Take it moment by moment, and you will find that we are all,
as I've said before, bugs in amber.'
 'You sound to me as though you don't believe in free will,' said Billy Pilgrim.
 'If I hadn't spent so much time studying Earthlings,' said the Tralfamadorian, 'I
wouldn't have any idea what was meant by "free will." I've visited thirty-one inhabited
planets in the universe, and I have studied reports on one hundred more. Only on Earth is
there any talk of free will.'
Five
 Billy Pilgrim says that the Universe does not look like a lot of bright little dots to the
creatures from Tralfamadore. The creatures can see where each star has been and where it
is going, so that the heavens are filled with rarefied, luminous spaghetti. And
Tralfamadorians don't see human beings as two-legged creatures, either. They see them
as great millipedes with babies' legs at one end and old people's legs at the other,' says
Billy Pilgrim.
 Billy asked for something to read on the trip to Tralfamadore. His captors had five
million Earthling books on microfilm, but no way to project them in Billy's cabin. They
had only one actual book in English, which would be placed in a Tralfamadorian
museum. It was Valley of the Dolls, by Jacqueline Susann.
 Billy read it, thought it was pretty good in spots. The people in it certainly had their
ups-and-downs, ups-and-downs. But Billy didn't want to read about the same ups-anddowns
over and over again. He asked if there wasn't, please, some other reading matters
around.
 'Only Tralfamadorian novels, which I'm afraid you couldn't begin to understand,' said
the speaker on the wall.
 'Let me look at one anyway.'
 So they sent him in several. They were little things. A dozen of them might have had
the bulk of Valley of the Dolls-with all its ups-and-downs, up-and-downs.
 Billy couldn't read Tralfamadorian, of course, but he could at least see how the books
were laid out-in brief clumps of symbols separated by stars. Billy commented that the
clumps might be telegrams.
 'Exactly,' said the voice.
 'They are telegrams?'
 'There are no telegrams on Tralfamadore. But you're right: each clump of-symbols is a
brief, urgent message describing a situation, a scene, We Tralfamadorians read them all at
once, not one after the other. There isn't any particular relationship between all the
messages, except that the author has chosen them carefully, so that, when seen all at
once, they produce an image of life that is beautiful and surprising and deep. There is no
beginning, no middle, no end, no suspense, no moral, no causes, no effects. What we
love in our books are the depths of many marvelous moments seen all at one time.'
 Moments after that, the saucer entered a time warp, and Billy was flung back into his
childhood. He was twelve years old, quaking as he stood with his mother and father on
Bright Angel Point, at the rim of Grand Canyon. The little human family was staring at
the floor of the canyon, one mile straight down.
 'Well,' said Billy's father, manfully kicking a pebble into space, 'there it is.' They had
come to this famous place by automobile. They had had several blowouts on the way.
 'It was worth the trip,' said Billy's mother raptly. 'Oh, God was it ever worth it.'
 Billy hated the canyon. He was sure that he was going to fall in. His mother touched
him, and he wet his pants.
 There were other tourists looking down into the canyon, too, and a ranger was there to
answer questions. A Frenchman who had come all the way from France asked the ranger
in broken English if many people committed suicide by jumping in.
 'Yes, sir,' said the ranger. 'About three folks a year.' So it goes.
 And Billy took a very short trip through time, made a peewee jump of only ten days, so
he was still twelve, still touring the West with his family. Now they were down in
Carlsbad Caverns, and Billy was praying to God to get him out of there before the ceiling
fell in.
 A ranger was explaining that the Caverns had been discovered by a cowboy who saw a
huge cloud of bats come out of a hole in the ground. And then he said that he was going
to turn out all the lights., and that it would probably be the first time in the lives of most
people there that they had ever been in darkness that was total.
 Out went the lights. Billy didn't even know whether he was still alive or not. And then
something ghostly floated in air to his left. It had numbers on it. His father had taken out
his Pocket watch. The watch had a radium dial.
 Billy went from total dark to total light, found himself back in the war, back in the
delousing station again. The shower was over. An unseen hand had turned the water off.
 When Billy got his clothes back, they weren't any cleaner, but all the little animals that
had been living in them were dead. So it goes. And his new overcoat was thawed out and
limp now. It was much too small for Billy. It had a fur collar and a g of crimson silk, and
had apparently been made for an impresario about as big as an organ-grinder's monkey. It
was full of bullet holes.
 Billy Pilgrim dressed himself. He put on the little overcoat, too. It split up the back,
and, at the shoulders, the sleeves came entirely free. So the coat became a fur-collared
vest. It was meant to flare at its owners waist, but the flaring took place at Billy's armpits.
'The Germans found him to be one of the most screamingly funny things they had seen in
all of the Second World War. They laughed and laughed.
 And the Germans told everybody else to form in ranks of five, with Billy as their pivot.
Then out of doors went the parade, and through gate after gate again. 'There were more
starving Russians with faces like radium dials. The Americans were livelier than before.
The jazzing with hot water had cheered them up. And they came to a shed where a
corporal with only one arm and one eye wrote the name and serial number of each
prisoner in a big, red ledger. Everybody was legally alive now. Before they got their
names and numbers in that book, they were missing in action and probably dead.
 So it goes.
 As the Americans were waiting to move on, an altercation broke out in their rear-most
rank. An American had muttered something which a guard did not like. The guard knew
English, and he hauled the American out of ranks knocked him down.
 The American was astonished. He stood up shakily, spitting blood. He'd had two teeth
knocked out. He had meant no harm by what he'd said, evidently, had no idea that the
guard would hear and understand.
 'Why me?' he asked the guard.
 The guard shoved him back into ranks. 'Vy you? Vy anybody?' he said.
 When Billy Pilgrim's name was inscribed in the ledger of the prison camp, he was
given a number, too, and an iron dogtag in which that number was stamped. A slave
laborer from Poland had done the stamping. He was dead now. So it goes.
 Billy was told to hang the tag around his neck along with his American dogtags, which
he did. The tag was like a salt cracker, perforated down its middle so that a strong man
could snap it in two with his bare hands. In case Billy died, which he didn't, half the tag
would mark his body and half would mark his grave.
 After poor Edgar Derby, the high school teacher, was shot in Dresden later on, a doctor
pronounced him dead and snapped his dogtag in two. So it goes.